The Hague, 26 Oct. 1872 Dear Sir, I regret that I have been unable to obtain any of the items you specified, since they all fetched more than the prices specified. They were all purchased by Mr Van Stockum, who had apparently been acting on commission. I do not know for whom, but hope to be able to discover it, since I know Mr Van Stockum’s son and he has promised to make enquiries. As soon as I hear anything I shall write informing you. The auction was very well attended, and I have heard that in general the prices paid were higher than usual. Approximately 30 guilders was paid for the nos. specified. With the request that you pay my respects to the De Jonge family, I am, yours faithfully, Your obedient servant V.W. van Gogh London, 2 July 1873 My dear friends, I wanted to write to you even earlier, and now I don’t want to put it off any longer. How are you? I’ve heard that you have made your house as neat as a new pin and that you’re doing well. I commend myself expressly to hear something from you, should you have a moment at your disposal. I’m doing well here; I’m seeing a lot of new and beautiful things, and have had luck in finding a good boarding-house, so that I already feel relatively 
   settled here. Still, I haven’t forgotten The Hague and should very, very much like to spend another evening in the Poten, and also look in on you. This branch is just a stockroom and is therefore completely different from working in The Hague, though I’m sure I’ll get used to it. I’m already finished with my work at 6 o’clock, so I still have a fair amount of time for myself, which I spend very pleasantly walking, reading and writing letters. The neighbourhood where I live is very pretty, and so peaceful and convivial that one almost forgets one is in London. In front of every house is a small garden with flowers or a couple of trees, and many houses are built very tastefully in a sort of Gothic style. Still, I have to walk for more than 
   half an hour to reach the countryside. We have a piano in the drawing room, and there are also three Germans living here who really love music, which is most agreeable. One of the nicest things I’ve seen here is Rotten Row in Hyde Park, which is a long, broad avenue where hundreds of ladies and gentlemen go riding. In every part of the city there are splendid parks with a wealth of flowers such as I’ve seen nowhere else. I enclose a copy of a poem by Van Beers, which you may not know. Our Elisabeth6 copied it out for me on my last evening in Helvoirt, because she knew how much I liked it. It’s Brabant to a T. I thought you’d enjoy reading it, so I’ve copied it out for you. 
   It was very thoughtful of your sister Marie to send me an announcement. I’m longing to hear about the wedding, on which I congratulate you as well. Would you be so kind as to send me a list of your birthdays when you get the opportunity? I had one which I’ve lost. And now, regards, bid everyone in the Poten good-day from me, and I wish you all well. Excuse the poor handwriting, it’s already late and time to go to bed. Good-night. Vincent    The evening hour10 Slowly the toll of the angelus-bell resounded o’er the fields, As they blissfully bathed in the gold of the evening sun. O solemn, moving moment! When every mother in the village suddenly Stops the whirring of the wheel to bless herself with the sign of the cross; While in the field the farmer reins in his steaming horses, And, behind the plough, bares his head to murmur an Ave. O solemn, moving moment! When the bell that proclaims far and wide The end of the day’s work makes those powerful, dripping heads Bow down for Him who causes the sweat in the furrow to thrive. For the artist, too, on the slope of yon shady hill, Absorbed in his painting from the earliest morning, The angelus now gave the sign to retreat. Slowly he wiped His brush and palette, which he stowed with his canvas in the valise, Folded his camp-stool and dreamily descended the path That leads, gently winding, through the flowery dale to the village. Yet how oft, before reaching the foot of the hill, did he Stand admiringly still, to imprint on his mind once again The refreshing scene down below, unfolding before his eyes. Just before him lay the village, with a hill to north and to south, Between whose crests the sun, inflamed and sinking in the west, Let flow the whole wealth of its colours and up-conjured glory. The bell, in the grey tower entwined with black-green ivy, Was now silent. Hanging motionless on high were the brown Sails of the windmill; the leaves stood still and above the huts Blue clouds of peat-smoke ascended so straight from the chimneys That they, too, seemed to hang motionless in the shimmering air. ’Twas as though this village, this field, those hills, as though everything, Before wrapping itself in a cloak of evening dew to sleep Beneath the sun’s parting kiss, silently and gratefully Recalled once more the peace and plenty it had again savoured. 
   Soon, though, this silence was gently disturbed by the sweet sounds Of the evening. In the distance, from a hollow in the hill echoed Lingeringly the sound of the cow-horn, calling the cattle. And at this sign from their herdsman there soon appeared in the furrowed, Sandy mountain road the whole of a colourful herd of cows. Cracking and smacking, the lad’s lash drove them forward, While they, as if by turns, their necks outstretched, with friendly lowing Greeted from afar the cow-shed where the milkmaid Waited for them each evening to ease their taut udders. Thus on the paths running out from the village like spokes From an axle, there slowly came movement and life. Here, ’twas a farmer, dragging homeward a harrow or plough On a sledge, whistling a tune and riding beside on his bay; There, a blushing lass, on her head a lock of sweet clover Laced with daisies and poppies, called from afar to the others, Kindly and gaily at once, her clear-toned ‘good evening’. Further... But on the same track where the painter’s path Led, he suddenly heard peals of joyous laughter. Rocking from side to side, a wagon, nearly toppling Under its load of fresh-harvested buckwheat, came rumbling closer, Both horse and burden adorned with fluttering ribbons and greenery. Children, all with wreaths of flowers on their little flaxen heads, Were seated on top, happily waving branches of alder, Or scattering flowers and leaves, which rained down on all sides, While round the wagon a troop of country lads and lasses Skipped and sang enough to startle the whole drowsy plain. Quietly smiling, the Painter, from behind the thicket, Watched as the revellers slowly wound their way down the rutted road. ‘Aye’, he thus mumbled, ‘Aye, the Lord must think it A happy sound, the jubilance with which these hearts 
   So simply pour forth their thanks as they gather the last Fruits, which He yearly lets grow fully ripe from their toil. Yea, for the purest prayer of simplicity and innocence is joy!’ And thus contemplating the calm, deep delight upon which the soul Feasts in the fields; or with his artist’s mind reconstructing In silent rapture the glorious scene of a moment ago, He found he had sauntered, unnoticing, into the village. Already the purple and yellow had faded to grey in the west, And in the east there had risen close by the little church the full Copper-coloured disc of the moon, in mist enshrouded, When he entered The Swan, the inn where he boarded. Jan van Beers (The boarder) London, 7 August 1873 My dear friends, It was a very pleasant surprise for me to receive Caroline’s letter. Thank you. I sincerely hope that she’s now completely better; fortunately, it’s past. When you write again sometime I must hear more about that last piece you made. I was truly astounded by it; for 10 people, that’s surely the biggest you’ve done. The last few days I’ve enjoyed reading the poems of John Keats; he’s a poet who isn’t very well known in Holland, I believe. He’s the 
   favourite of the painters here, and that’s how I came to be reading him. Herewith something by him. His most famous piece is ‘St Agnes’ eve’, but it’s rather too long to copy out. I haven’t yet been to the Crystal Palace and the Tower, nor to Tussaud’s;5 I’m not at all in a hurry to go and see everything. For the time being I have enough with the museums, parks, &c., which attract me more. I had a nice day last Monday. The first Monday in Aug. is a holiday here. I went with one of the Germans to Dulwich, an hour and a half outside L., to see the museum there, and afterwards we walked to a village about an hour further on. The countryside here is so beautiful; many people who have their business in L. live in some village or other outside L. and come to the city every day by train. Perhaps I’ll 
   soon be doing that as well, if I can find a cheap room somewhere. But I find moving so terrible that I’ll stay here as long as possible, though things aren’t as nice here as they seemed at first. Perhaps this is my fault, so I’ll wait a little longer. I’m sorry that my letter isn’t as I’d wish it to be, I’m writing in haste. But I wanted to congratulate you on Willem’s birthday8 and wish you many happy returns. It gave me a great deal of pleasure to hear that you had renewed your acquaintance with the Tersteeg family. I had long been hoping that you would, for your sake. Write to me when you get the chance and tell me which photographs you’ve received, I’m curious to know. 
   I’ve had a letter from Marinus, and have understood from it that he’s going to Amsterdam. That will be a big change for him, I hope he’ll do well. I was glad he wrote to me. A day or two ago I had a visit from a brother of Iterson who lives here, and so had the first opportunity of speaking Dutch since May. We live a long way from each other, which I very much regret. And now I bid you good-day, I wish you well. Many regards to everyone in the Poten. I wish you well, Yours truly, Vincent Cheer me up soon with a letter if you can find the time. 
   The eve of Saint Mark12 (Unfinished) Upon a Sabbath day it fell; Twice holy was the Sabbath bell, That called the folk to evening prayer; The city streets were clear and fair From wholesome drench of April rains; And, on the western window panes, The chilly sunset faintly told Of unmatured green, vallies cold, Of the green thorny bloomless hedge, Of rivers new with spring-tide sedge, Of primroses by shelter’d rills, Of daisies on the aguish hills. Twice holy was the Sabbath-bell: The silent streets were crowded well With staid and pious companies, Warm from their fire-side orat’ries; And moving, with demurest air To even-song, and vesper prayer. Each arched porch, and entry low, Was fill’d with patient folk and slow, With whispers hush and shuffling feet, While played the organ, loud and sweet. The bells had ceased, the prayers begun, And Bertha had not yet half done A curious volume, patch’d and torn, That all day long, from earliest morn, Had taken captive her two eyes, Among its golden broideries; Perplexed her with a thousand things, The stars of Heaven, and angels’ wings, Martyrs in a fiery blaze, Azure saints and silver rays Moses’ breastplate, and the seven Candlesticks John saw in Heaven, The winged lion of Saint Mark, And the covenantal Ark, With its many mysteries Cherubim and golden mice. 
   Bertha was a maiden fair, Dwelling in th’old minster-square; From her fireside she could see, Sidelong, its rich antiquity, Far as the Bishops gardenwall; Where sycamores and elm trees tall, Full leaved, the forest had outstript, By no sharp north wind ever nipt, So shelter’d by the mighty pile, Bertha arose and read awhile, With forehead ’gainst the window pane. Again she tried and tried again, Until the dusk eve left her dark Upon the legend of St Mark. From plaited lawn-frill, fine and thin, She lifted up her soft warm chin, With aching neck and swimming eyes And dazed with saintly imag’ries. All was gloom, and silent all Save now and then the still foot-fall Of one returning homewards late, Past the echoing minster-gate. The clamorous daws, that all the day Above tree tops and towers play, Pair by pair had gone to rest, Each in its ancient belfry-nest, Where asleep they fall betimes To music and the drowsy chimes. All was silent, all was gloom, Abroad and in the homely room: Down she sat, poor cheated soul! And struck a lamp from the dismal coal; Leaned forward, with bright drooping hair, And slant book, full against the glare. Her shadow, in uneasy guise, Hover’d about, a giant size, On ceiling beam and old oak chair, The parrot’s cage, and panel square; And the warm angled winter-screen, On which were many monsters seen, Call’d doves of Siam, Lima mice, And legless birds of Paradise, Macaw, and tender Av’davat, And silken-furr’d Angora cat. 
   Untired she read, her shadow still Glower’d about, as it would fill The room with wildest forms and shades, As though some ghostly queen of spades Had come to mock behind her back And dance, and ruffle her garments black. Untired she read the legend page, Of holy Mark, from youth to age, On land, on sea, in pagan chains, Rejoicing for his many pains. Sometimes the learned eremite, With golden star, or dagger bright, Referr’d to pious poesies Written in smallest crow-quill size Beneath the text; and thus the rhyme Was parcell’d out from time to time:     John Keats (1818) The imagination may be compared to Adam’s dream; ‘he awoke and found it truth’. Autumn14 Season of mist, and mellow fruitfulness! Close bosom-friend to the maturing sun; Conspiring with him how to load and bless With fruit the vines that round the thatch-eaves run; To bend with apples the moss’d cottage trees, And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells With a sweet kernel; to set budding more, And still more, later flowers for the bees, Until they think warm days will never cease, For summer has o’erbrimm’d their clammy cells. Where are the songs of spring? Ay, where are they? Think not of them, thou hast thy music too, While barred clouds bloom the soft-dying day, And touch the stubble-plains with rosy hue; Then in a wailful choir the small gnats mourn Among the river sallows, borne aloft. Or sinking as the light wind lives or dies; And full-grown lambs loud bleat from hilly bourn; Hedge-crickets sing; and now with treble soft The redbreast whistles from a garden croft, And gathering swallows twitter in the skies. London, Oct. 1873 Dear Caroline and Willem, Many thanks for your letter of this morning. It was a wonderful surprise, I’m happy you’re doing so well. Our Anna has passed her examinations in English and in needlework, you can imagine how delighted she and all of us are. Pa and Ma have suggested that she stay at school until next April, and in that case attempt French, but if she’d rather not she needn’t do it. I’d like it so much if something could be found for her here; we’ve talked about this before, as you know. You already know that Theo is coming to The Hague, I think it a good change for him, even though it will be difficult for him 
   to leave beautiful, convivial Brussels. I also received a letter from your Pa2 some time ago and have already answered it, so you’ll probably have heard that things are continuing to go well for me here, and also know a thing or two about my new lodgings. What you say about winter is quite right, I think so too. I myself almost don’t know which season I like best; I believe all of them, equally well. It’s striking that the old painters almost never painted the autumn and that the moderns have such a particular preference for it. Herewith a couple of small photos which I hope will be to your liking. Here there are practically no albums like those we have in Holland, but rather so-
  called ‘scrapbooks’ in which one puts photographs, as I’ve done in this letter (which explains why we don’t put the photos in mounts here), the advantage of which is that one can arrange all shapes and sizes on the same sheet however one wants. I would advise you to buy a kind of writing-book with blank pages and to put these in it, for a start. ‘A baptism’ is after Anker, a Swiss, who has painted all manner of subjects, all equally sensitive and intimate. ‘Puritans going to church’ is after Boughton, one of the best painters here; an American, he’s very fond of Longfellow, and rightly so. I know 3 paintings by him based on ‘The courtship of Miles Standish’. Seeing the paintings prompted me to read Miles Standish and Evangeline7 again, I don’t know why, but I never knew they were as beautiful as I find them now. ‘The good friar’ is after Van Muyden, a Swiss painter, having ‘as yet more modesty than talent’.
  Mr Post in The Hague has this painting. If you visit our gallery ask to see his (Van Muyden’s) ‘Refectory’. There are no more than 4 or 5 copies of this photograph, because the negative is broken. Show it to Mr Tersteeg when you have the opportunity. ‘The honeymoon’ is after Eugène Feyen, one of the few painters who paint intimate modern life as it really is and don’t turn it into fashion plates. I know the photo of ‘The landlady’s daughter’15 and I find it very beautiful. It’s good that you find Bouguereau beautiful. Not everyone is as capable as you are of noticing and feeling good and fine things. And now I’ll stop; I’m enclosing another picture of autumn, by Michelet. I hope you’ll be able to read this; I just kept on writing without thinking that one should take care to make a letter legible. Adieu, I wish you both the best; many regards to those in the Poten17 and to any other friends you might see. Vincent. 
   From here I see a lady, I see her walking, pensive, in a garden that is not very big and has lost its flowers quite early, but is sheltered, like the ones one sees behind our cliffs in France or the dunes of Holland. The exotic shrubs have already gone back into the greenhouse. The fallen leaves reveal some statues. A sumptuousness of art, which contrasts slightly with the very simple attire of the lady — modest, grave — the black (or grey) silk of which is barely brightened by a plain lilac ribbon. Unadorned, this we can say, she is no less elegant. Elegant for her husband and simple for the benefit of the poor. She reaches the end of the avenue, turns. We can see her. But have I not seen her before in the museums of Amsterdam or The Hague? She reminds me of a lady by Philippe de Champaigne (NB in the Louvre), who had found 
   her way into my heart, so ingenuous, so honest, sufficiently intelligent, yet simple, without the subtlety to extricate herself from the snares of the world. This woman has remained with me for thirty years, obstinately returning to me, worrying me, making me say, ‘But what was she called? What became of her? Did she have a little happiness? And how did she manage to get through life?’ She reminds me of another portrait, a Van Dyck, a poor woman, very pale, unhealthy. The pale satin of her incomparably delicate skin clothes a sickly body, which is beginning to slacken. A great melancholy fills her lovely eyes, the melancholy of old age? Of heartbreaks, of the climate too, perhaps. It is the vague, distant look of someone who has lived within sight of the vast North Sea, the great grey sea, deserted but for the flight of the seagull. Jules Michelet Les aspirations de l’automne. London, 20 Nov. 1873. Dearest Caroline, I wish you many happy returns;1 it will surely be a festive day, this first birthday in your own house. I hope that this will be a very good and happy year for you both. You’ve received my last letter, I hope. Write soon with news of how everyone is doing. I’m longing 
   to hear something again. Have you seen Theo yet? I heard that he arrived in The Hague last Wednesday. Herewith a small contribution for the album. I’m fine, but I’m up to my ears in work, and only have a moment. Bid good-day to everyone in the Poten;4 how I’d like to look in on you today. I wish you both the best. Yours truly, Vincent. London, 9 February 1874 My dear Caroline, I feel the need to write a few words to you. What happy days those were ‘when we were together’. You must know that I haven’t forgotten you, but writing doesn’t come to me as easily as I’d like. I have a rich life here, ‘having nothing, yet possessing all things’. Sometimes I start to believe that I’m gradually beginning to turn into a true cosmopolitan, meaning not a Dutchman, Englishman or Frenchman, but simply a man. 
   With the world as my mother country, meaning that tiny spot in the world where we’re set down. But we aren’t there yet, but I follow after, if that I may apprehend. And as our ideal that which Mauve calls ‘that’s it’. Old girl, adieu. Yours truly, Vincent A handshake for you and Willem, like old times, so that it hurts your fingers. London, 3 March 1874 Dear Caroline and Willem, My hearty congratulations. I imagine you will have been disappointed not to have heard from me sooner, but that’s like me, and you surely know that I mean well. Now you must render good for evil, however, and write to me directly about how things are going. Now I have a piece of news for you; our Anna will perhaps be coming here. You can imagine how wonderful that would be for me, but it’s almost too good to be true. Well, we’ll just have to wait and see. If she comes, it will probably be in May, 
   and perhaps it could be arranged for me to come and fetch her. I’d like so much to get to know her better than I do, for in the last few years we’ve actually seen very little of each other, and we only half know each other. I wish you both the best, many regards to everyone in the Poten, and if someone or other asks after me. Have you kept up your acquaintance with the Tersteeg family? Yours truly, Vincent Dearest Betsy, I had wanted to fill this little book with drawings for you, but Theo is leaving today, so I don’t have any more time. You’ll just have to have it the way it is, and when I come back next year I’ll make a new one. Next Monday3 I’m going back to London with my sister Anna, to the house I’ve drawn for you, and then I’ll be travelling on the little steamboat that I’ve 
   drawn here. Well, Betsy, adieu, until next year. Vincent  Paris, 2 Sept. 1875 My dear Borchers, Thanks for your letter, which I received this morning and which gave me pleasure. I hope to come to Holland at Christmas and, if I can, immediately to The Hague, and we must then make sure not to miss each other. I’m glad that you still have a passion for reading, that’s always good, at least such books as you read. I still keep it up, too; an employee in our office1 who has gone on holiday 
         to Holland has just promised to bring me a copy of ‘Motley, Geschiedenis der 17 provinciën’. As you know, I’m now in Paris; so I’ve wandered rather a lot since we saw each other on my last day in The Hague, and it seems to me that it was a great deal longer than 2 years ago. Warm regards, give my regards to your Mother and sisters as well, and believe me Ever yours, V.W. van Gogh Ivy-Cottage Welwyn, 19 Dec. 1875. Dear Vincent and Theo, My heartfelt thanks to you both for your last letters, which we were very glad to receive. How wonderful it will be at home at Christmas. It’s been very cold here, but now it’s very mild. Theo, how awful about your leg, is it now completely better? We’ll 
   probably have a Christmas tree. Our holiday begins on Thursday. And now, goodbye dear Vincent and Theo, I wish you both a very merry Christmas. Yours, your loving sister Wil. P.S. I thank you for what you sent, I was very glad to get it. Etten, 4 April 1876. Dear Theo! We’re happy that things are going well for you, and hope that the fine weather and new greenery are making your trip pleasant, but more than anything we wish you much success and are curious to hear about it. Vincent arrived home safe and sound on Saturday, we were glad he was here, and you can imagine how delighted we were to hear that on his last morning in Paris he was given the prospect of something. He’ll probably tell you about it; it’s the confirmation of the text for the day for his birthday. We can but hope, it’s certainly a long way off – but surely it’s pleasant to be by the sea, may he fare well, it should be possible. It’s wonderful that you’ll be seeing each other, and also Lies, who’s coming on Thursday. We’re awfully sorry that you didn’t see Aunt Mina, and we didn’t even hear how Vos is. Don’t you think it very sad, poor Kee and Uncle and Aunt, maybe the good weather will do some good. Vincent brought along 
   a lot of beautiful things to show us. Yesterday he and Pa went to Brussels. Pa is in the garden house even before the confirmation class, it’s going to be very charming in the garden. And now I’ll say goodbye and hope that you’ll still be coming on Saturday evening. Cor3 is taking piano lessons. It’s quite a task in the beginning. Goodbye, dearest Theo! Have a good trip – until Saturday. Ever: Yours, your loving Ma.  My dear Theo, On the morning before my departure from Paris4 I received a letter from a teacher in Ramsgate5 who suggested that I come there for a month (without pay) in order to see whether he can use me at the end of that time. You can imagine that I’m glad to have found something. I’ll receive free board and lodging in any case. Yesterday I went with Pa to Brussels, Uncle Hein was really in a very sad state. In the train Pa and I talked a lot about paintings, including the paintings by Rembrandt in the Louvre7 and the portrait of Burgomaster Six,
   and also especially about Michel. Won’t there be a possibility for Pa to see that book about Michel? Think about it if the opportunity arises. I’m so glad that I’ll see you, and Lies too, before my departure. Ramsgate, as you know, is a seaside resort. I saw in a book that it has 12, inhabitants, but don’t know any more about it than that. And now, until Saturday. Have a safe trip, ever Your loving brother Vincent. Gladwell brought me to the train last Friday evening. On my birthday11 he came in the morning at half past six already, and brought a very beautiful etching after Chauvel for me, an autumn landscape with a flock of sheep on a sandy road.  Dear Theo! It was a pleasure for us to receive your letter. Have an enjoyable trip. You’re lucky to have fairly good weather. We’re curious to hear what has happened in the meantime, and will be delighted to see you if you come this way. Yesterday I went with Vincent to Brussels and back in one day. We also went to the cemetery in Laken, where I also went with you! 
   I thought of you so much. We’re glad that Vincent got something, and must wait and see what comes of it. May God guide him and you and all of us. Pain and disappointment also bring much that is good and comforting. The text for his birthday was, ‘The Lord will provide’. Good letters from the girls16 as well – Lies also speaks of you with so much warmth. I wish you well, ever Your most loving father T. v. G. Arrived safely. Boarding school, 24 boys. Think it’s all right. Regards to all. V. v. G.  Ramsgate, 17 April 1876. Dear Father and Mother, By now you’ve no doubt received the telegram, but will be wanting to know more particulars. I wrote down a few things in the train and am sending you that, so you can see how my trip went. Friday We want to stay together today. Which would be better, the joy of seeing each other again or the sadness of parting? We’ve often parted from each other already, though this time there was more sorrow than before, on both sides, but courage as well, from the firmer faith in, and greater need for, blessing. And wasn’t it as though nature sympathized with us? It was so grey and rather dismal a couple of hours ago. Now I look out over rolling pastures, and everything is so quiet and the sun is setting behind the grey clouds and throws a golden glow across the land. How much we long for each other, those first hours after parting, which you’re spending in church and I in the station and the train, and how much we think of the others, of Theo, and of Anna and the other 
  sisters and of little brother. We just passed Zevenbergen, and I thought of the day you took me there and I stood on Mr Provily’s4 steps and watched your carriage driving away down the wet street. And then the evening when my Father came to visit me for the first time. And that first homecoming at Christmas. Saturday and Sunday. How much I thought of Anna on the boat; everything there reminded me of our journey together. The weather was clear, and on the Maas6 especially it was beautiful, also the view from the sea of the dunes, gleaming white in the sun. The last thing one saw of Holland was a small grey tower. I stayed on deck until sunset, but then it grew cold and dismal. The next morning in the train from Harwich to London it was beautiful to see in the morning twilight the black fields and green pastures with sheep and lambs, and here and there a hedge of thorn-bushes and a few large oak trees with dark branches and grey, moss-covered trunks. The blue twilit sky, still with a few stars, and a bank of grey clouds above the horizon. Even before the sun rose I heard a lark. When we arrived at the last station before London the sun rose. The bank of grey clouds had disappeared and there was the sun, so simple and as big as possible, a real Easter sun. The grass was sparkling with dew and night frost. And yet I prefer that grey hour when we parted. Saturday afternoon I stayed on deck until the sun was down. The water was quite dark blue as far as one could see, with rather high waves with white crests. The coast had already disappeared from view. The sky was light blue, burnished and without a cloud. And the sun went down and cast a streak of dazzling light on the water. 
   It was a truly grand and majestic sight, and yet simpler, quieter things move one so much more deeply, for now I couldn’t help shuddering, and thought of the night in the stuffy saloon with smoking and singing passengers. A train was leaving for Ramsgate 2 hours after my arrival in London. That’s another train ride of around 4 1/2 hours. It’s a beautiful ride; we passed, among other things, a hilly region. The hills have a sparse covering of grass at the bottom and oak woods on the top. It’s very similar to our dunes. Between those hills lay a village with a grey church covered with ivy like most of the houses. The orchards were in blossom, and the sky was light blue with grey and white clouds. We also came past Canterbury, a town which still has a lot of medieval buildings, in particular a splendid church with old elm trees around it. Often, already, I’ve seen something of this town in paintings. You can imagine how I sat looking out of the window, watching well ahead of time for Ramsgate. I arrived at Mr Stokes’s around 1 o’clock. He was away from home but will be coming back this evening. During his absence his place was taken by his son (23 years old, I think), a schoolmaster in London. I saw Mrs Stokes9 in the afternoon at table. There are 24 boys between the ages of 10 and 14. (It was a fine sight, seeing those 24 boys eating.) So the school isn’t large. The window looks out onto the sea. After eating we went for a walk by the sea, it’s beautiful there. The houses on the sea are mostly built of yellow brick in a simple Gothic style, and have gardens full of cedars and other dark evergreen shrubs. There’s a harbour full of ships, closed in by stone jetties on which one can walk. And further out one sees the sea in its natural state, and that’s beautiful. Yesterday everything was grey. In the evening we went to church with the boys. On the wall of the church was written ‘Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world’. The boys go to bed at 8 o’clock and get up at 6. 
   There’s another assistant teacher, 17 years old. He, 4 boys and I sleep in another house close by, where I have a small room, which wants some prints on the wall. And now enough for today, what a good time we had together, thank you, thank you for everything. Many regards to Lies, Albertine13 and little brother, and in thought a handshake from Your loving Vincent. Thanks for your letters which just arrived; more soon, when I’ve been here a few days and have seen Mr Stokes. Isleworth, 13 October 1876 Dearest Mother and Theo, The boys will be going home tomorrow and then I’ll get my money. I asked Mr Jones to let me go and see you in these three days, my heart is so much with you. It now depends on you two, if you say, ‘you may come’, then Mr Jones will let me go. Besides wanting so much to sit at Theo’s bedside, I should also like so very much to talk to my Mother, and if possible to go to Etten once more to see and speak to my Father again. It would be but a short visit, I could stay with you one or two days. Last Monday I was in Richmond again and took as my text1 ‘He hath sent me to preach the gospel to the poor’. But he who wants to preach the gospel must first have it in his own heart, oh, that I might find it, for it is only the words spoken in singleness and from the abundance of the heart3 that can bear fruit. One of these days, perhaps, I’ll go to London or Lewisham again. I just gave Mr Jones’s girls5 a German lesson, and after the lesson I told them Andersen’s story The snow queen. If you can, write and tell me by return of post if I may come. I was glad to have Ma’s last letter. 
   I hope to visit Mr Stokes’s school one of these days. And then I hope to buy a new pair of shoes to prepare myself. The view from the window in your room is no doubt beautiful now, I know it from days past, you know. We’re having a lot of rain here; it’s probably the same where you are. I’ll have two or three weeks around Christmas to go to Holland, should Anna be able to come as well we could perhaps travel together. And now we’re gradually heading towards winter again, make sure you’re completely better when it arrives. It is indeed wonderful that Christmas falls in the winter. Oh how I’m looking forward to it, old boy, to make my rounds here and there at Turnham Green when it’s cold. When I think of you like this, as of ‘one whom his Mother comforteth and who is worthy of being comforted by his Mother’, it is with envy. Do get well soon, in any case. Yesterday I asked Mr Jones to let me go, but he didn’t want to give his consent and said at last, write to your Mother, if she thinks it’s all right then so do I. It is indeed a beautiful poem, that one by De Génestet: On the lofty heights of suffering, Steep the path to the Holy Land, Steep the path one upward strives, Steep the path to better lives. On these lofty heights of suffering, Led by God’s own loving hand. From their peaks – it did seem nearer To the starry, holy sphere, And the dwelling of the Father – Down upon the world I peered. And yet I thought of that one morning, Of a morning long ago, When I, laughing without caring, Glimpsed, O Lord, Thy world below. 
   And now I’ll copy out something for my brother: I love the Lord, because He hath heard my voice and my supplications. Because He hath inclined His ear unto me, therefore will I call upon Him as long as I live. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. Then called I upon the name of the Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul. Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our Lord is merciful. The Lord preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and He helped me. Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. For Thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted: I said in my haste, all men are liars. What shall I render unto the Lord for all His benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord. O Lord, truly I am Thy servant; a son of Thine handmaid: Thou hast loosed my bonds. I will offer to Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all His people, in the courts of the Lord’s house. I called upon the Lord in distress: the Lord answered me, and set me in a large place. The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto me? The Lord taketh my part with them that help me. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. ‘For he knoweth not that which shall be.’12 May our shortsightedness ask to know no more than the Omniscient wanted to make known to us, and may our dependence slowly yield to the Almighty. That is the lesson for the day. When I was a lad14 When I was a lad, my life carefree as ever, I girt myself up, did whatever I chose, Free to go wand’ring, to seek, to endeavour, Free in my travels, my dreams, my repose. Even for me, though, the hour was nearing Of calling, of mercy, of seriousness, When in my bosom the voice I’d been hearing Enquired ‘Do you love me?’ – my soul answered ‘Yes’. Since that hour of waking my dreams are no longer, Another now leads me, at times ’gainst my will, Teaches my hands to reach eagerly further, To follow and carry, oh, happy and still. Yet now that life’s governed by the Supreme Being, Despite pain and fetters, my soul torn apart – I find what in life I’d once vainly been seeking: More rest and more peace for my uneasy heart. And now a handshake to you both and to Mr and Mrs Roos and to Willem, and to anyone else you might see whom I know. And let me know soon how you are and believe me Your most loving brother, Vincent Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do? is a question that often springs to one’s lips, and often we must ask, Oh, bless that which I shall do. May that prayer of ours be heard: Father, I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil. So be it. 
   It happened that we found ourselves alone, my mother and I, at an open window, where we had a view of the garden of the house to which we had betaken ourselves at the harbour of Ostia. There, far from the crowd, we were awaiting the time of the crossing after the fatigue of a long journey. We were alone, conversing with inexpressible pleasure; and, forgetting the past and dwelling completely on the future, we talked about what that eternal life of the saints would be like, which no eye hath seen, nor ear heard, nor any heart conceived. And, transported on the wings of Love to Him who is, we wandered in spirit to those heavenly spheres, whence the stars, the moon and the sun send us their light. And rising ever higher in our thoughts, in our words, in the admiration of Thy works, O Lord, it was as though we left our bodies, in order to attain uncreated wisdom, which is what it was, what it ever will be, or rather, in which there is no ‘having been’ or ‘what must still be’ but only ‘being’, because it is eternal, because ‘having been’ and ‘what must still be’ exclude eternity. And as we were speaking thus, in the flight of our thoughts towards that life, we touched it for an instant in spirit, and we groaned and allowed to be caught the first-fruits of the spirit, and descended again to the sound of voices, to words that begin and end. Thus we spoke: If there is a soul in which the voice of the flesh falls silent, which imposes silence on itself, and, forgetting itself, oversteps its innermost bounds; if the last voice is lost in silence, after our soul has raised itself to the origin of all things, and He alone speaks, not through His creatures but through himself, if He speaks to us, He alone whom we hold dear above all else; if He speaks to us while everything drains out of us and while all beholding of a lower order stops, holding the viewer in thrall, enraptured, in his quiet joy and carrying him away; if eternal life is ultimately the same as this brief bliss that makes us go on groaning; is that not the promise held by the words ‘Enter thou into the joy of Thy Lord’? Such were our thoughts as we spoke. Augustine18 For where two or three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them. I just received Pa’s letter. Thank God. May God make us brothers. Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, and is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not 
   in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. And now abideth faith, hope, Charity; but the greatest of these is Charity. As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing; as chastened, but not killed. As one whom his mother comforteth. From here I see a lady, I see her walking, pensive, in a garden that is not very big and has lost its flowers quite early, but is sheltered, like the ones one sees behind our cliffs in France or the dunes of Holland. The exotic shrubs have already gone back into the greenhouse. The fallen leaves reveal some statues which one is all the more eager to look at now that the flowers have gone. A sumptuousness of art, which contrasts slightly with the very simple attire of the lady — modest, grave — the black or grey silk of which is barely brightened by a plain lilac ribbon. Unadorned, this we can say, she is no less elegant. Elegant for her husband and simple for the benefit of the poor. She reaches the end of the avenue, turns. We can see her. But have I not seen her before in the museums of Amsterdam or The Hague? She reminds me of a lady by Philippe de Champaigne, who had found her way into my heart, so ingenuous, so honest, sufficiently intelligent, yet simple, without the subtlety to extricate herself from the snares of this world. This woman has remained with me for thirty years, obstinately returning to me, worrying me, making me say, But what was she called? What became of her? Did she have a little happiness? And how did she manage to get through life? She reminds me of another portrait, a Van Dyck, a poor woman, very pale, unhealthy. The pale satin of the incomparably delicate skin clothes a sickly body, which is beginning to slacken. A great melancholy fills her lovely eyes, the melancholy of old age? Of heartbreaks, of the climate too, perhaps. It is the vague, distant look of someone who has lived within sight of the vast North Sea, the great grey sea, deserted but for the flight of the seagull. Michelet, Les aspirations de l’automne. Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the elders of the land. The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoil. She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life. She riseth while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens. Her candle goeth not out by night. She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy. She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her household are clothed with scarlet. Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come. She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindness. She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleness. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth her, saying: Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all. Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates. Two things have I required of the Lord; deny me them not before I die: Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me. It is better to be in the house of mourning than in the house of feasting. Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our Love for Thee make that bond ever stronger, and let our latter days be closer to Thee and therefore better than these. When once life’s evening overcomes me, worn down by ills and strife always, for every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Intreat me not to leave Thee, Lord, or to return from following after Thee. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God. Isleworth, 17 November 1876 Dear Father and Mother, Thank God Theo continues to get better, and bully for him, already walking in the snow to Het Heike1 with Pa, how I’d have liked to walk along with you both. It’s already late, and early tomorrow morning I have to go to London and Lewisham for Mr Jones, where I hope to drop by and see Gladwell. It will be late at night before I’m home again. Where do Mr Jones and the others get their income from? Yes, I’ve thought about that many times. Here one often hears it said that God takes care of those who work for Him. I dearly long to talk to you about this and to confer. You then ask, too, whether I still give lessons to the boys: I do so every day until 1 o’clock, and then after 1 o’clock I usually have to go out for Mr Jones, or sometimes also teach Mr Jones’s children or a couple of boys in town. And then in the evening and in my spare moments I write in my sermon book. Last Sunday I arrived at Turnham Green early to teach at Sunday school; it was a real, English, rainy day. In the morning Mr Jones delivered a sermon on the woman of Samaria, and afterwards there was Sunday school. I also have to do this during the week; there are quite a few children, but it’s a job to round them all up regularly. In the afternoon Mr Jones and his son3 and I went 
   and had tea with the sexton, a shoemaker who lives in one of the suburbs. There was a view from the window there that reminded me very much of Holland – a flat, grass-covered area, which the torrential rains had turned almost into a morass, surrounded by rows of little red houses with their gardens and the lights of the street-lamps that were being lit. In the evening Mr Jones delivered a sermon on Naaman the Syrian, very beautiful, and afterwards the walk home. Last Thursday Mr Jones let me take his turn, and I took as my text ‘I would to God, that not only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds’. Next Sunday evening I have to go to Petersham to a Methodist church;7 Petersham is a village on the Thames, about 20 minutes beyond Richmond; I don’t know yet what I’ll talk about, the prodigal son8 or Ps. 42:1. Mornings and evenings Sunday school at Turnham Green. And so the weeks pass and we approach winter, and the congenial Christmas festivities. Tomorrow I have to be in two remote parts of London, in Whitechapel – that extremely poor area which you’ll have read about in Dickens10 – and then cross the Thames in a boat 
   and from there to Lewisham. Mr Jones’s children are better again, but now 3 of the boys have the measles. This week I had to go on a journey for Mr Jones with one of the boys to Acton Green, which is that grassy area that the sexton’s window looks out on. It was surprisingly muddy there, but it was a beautiful sight when it began to grow dark and the mist rose and one saw the light of a small church in the middle of the green. And to our left were railway tracks on a rather high embankment, and at that moment a train came, and that was a beautiful sight, the red glow of the locomotive and the rows of lights inside the carriages in the twilight. To our right a few horses were grazing in a meadow surrounded by a hedge of hawthorn and blackberry bushes. As I sit writing to you in my room and it’s so very, very quiet and I look around at your portraits and the prints on the wall, Christus Consolator12 and Good Friday13 and the Women at the sepulchre14 and The old Huguenot15 and The prodigal son by Ary Scheffer16 and the little boat on a stormy sea17 and one etching, 
   an autumn landscape, view of the heath, which I got from Harry Gladwell on my birthday, and when I think of all of you and then of all those here and of Turnham Green and Richmond and Petersham &c., then I feel ‘Stay, Lord, and hear the prayer my Mother said for me when I left my parent’s house: Father, I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil, and, Lord, oh if Thou would only make me, not only almost but altogether, as it were, my Father’s brother, a Christian and a Christian worker. Complete Thy work in me which Thou hast begun. Yea, make me, slowly but surely, step by step, and almost and altogether, my Father’s brother. And O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our love for Thee make that bond ever stronger.’22 And now good-night to you both and to Theo23 and Willemien and Cor, I’m longing again for a letter from you. Good-night, I have to get up early tomorrow, a handshake in thought from Your most loving and affectionate Vincent From the other end of L. I bid you all good-day! I left this morning at 4 o’clock, now it’s 2. I just came through the old cabbage fields, now on to Lewisham. A man sometimes says, how shall I manage it? Adieu. Dordrecht, 8 March 1877 My dear Uncle, When Pa was here recently1 he told me that you had asked whether Theo and I could come and see you some day. I long so much to see and talk to you and Aunt again, and so I’d like to ask if it would be convenient for you if Theo and I came next Sunday with the first train from The Hague, and stayed with you until the afternoon or evening. Theo has to go on a trip soon, and if we don’t do it now it may not be possible for a long time. It was a wonderful day when Pa was here recently; we took a walk together and also went to the museum to see the paintings by Scheffer. I’m doing well here, at the beginning of the year there’s a lot of work in the shop, so I’m there until 12 or 1 o’clock at night. I’m happy to be back in Holland, only I loved the work over there3 – even with all the trouble and deep disappointment connected with it – and continue to do so, and the disappointment and, for once, relative failure make me deeply attached to it.
   It’s wonderful that Anna has found another situation straightaway; I only hope it will be to her liking. If it’s all right with you that Theo and I come next Sunday, please write a postcard to one of us, and believe me meanwhile, after warm regards to you and Aunt Your loving nephew Vincent I would have written to you about this earlier if Pa hadn’t asked me only yesterday to go next Sunday. Amsterdam, 3 August 1877 Dear Mr Tersteeg, Theo told me of your loss in his last letter, and I feel the need to write a few words to you. ‘He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is Love’, I heard Rev. Keller van Hoorn, an old friend of my Father, deliver a sermon on this text in Dordrecht one Sunday evening, a few days after the death of his daughter. He said: what has given me strength and kept me going after this, the most crushing blow I have ever been dealt, was faith in my God, without which I cannot live – I found comfort yet again in the great riches of His words. He couldn’t help opening the Bible that lay before him and, as though reliving that moment of heartbreak, hit upon the same passage as then, namely: David therefore besought God for the child, when his child was very sick, and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead? But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead. Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat. Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread. And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live? But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. And also 1 Kings XIX:3-15: And when Elijah saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat. And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God.
   And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thy altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way. Then he closed the Bible and spoke at length and with incredible feeling about how our days and circumstances are different from those of David and Elijah, yet their God is not far from each and every one of us, and for us, too, there comes strength from Above, for when we are weak, then are we strong, his mouth spoke from the abundance of the heart, the words fell from his lips as the snow or the rain cometh down from heaven, one thing followed another, this was it, faith. Those words have a special sound coming at such moments from such lips: I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. Believest thou this? And those other words too: She is not dead, but sleepeth. My Father has also felt what you will have been feeling these past days. I recently stood early one morning in the cemetery at Zundert11 next to the little grave on which is written: Suffer the little children to come unto Me, for of such is the kingdom of God. More than 25 years have passed since he buried his first little boy there, in those days he was moved by a book by Bungener13 which I sent to you yesterday, thinking it would be a book after your own heart. All things will work together for good to them that love God, this has been his (namely my Father’s) experience at least, and in everything that has befallen him and his children he has until now grown gradually stronger, and his faith has taken root more firmly, so that there is a bond that never lets go of us, not even when we suffer the most, the bond of God’s love. When Cromwell was standing by his little boy’s body and a sword pierced his soul, as it were, these words gave him strength: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased and know how to abound, every where and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me (Philip IV:11-13). Have now been studying Latin and Greek for about 3 months and my tutor, Mendes da Costa, said a few days ago when I asked him about it that we had progressed as far as he thought we would in this amount of time if I were suited for study, so I am not without hope and I go on from day to day with good hope, with something of the faith of old. My sister Anna is coming to Amsterdam today with my future brother-in-law and I am looking forward not a little to seeing them. Do not think ill of me for writing to you as I have done, I felt the need to do it. My warm regards to Mrs Tersteeg and Betsy and believe me, with a handshake in thought to all of you Yours truly, Vincent Would you be so good as to give the enclosed note to Theo? Brussels, Feb. 1881 Dear Pa and Ma, I received your letter and was glad to have it, for I had already been looking forward to it, especially because of Pa’s indisposition. It’s fortunate that he’s starting to get better. Things continue to go quite well with my work, although it’s still imperfect and must improve a lot. I found a very good illustration of a skeleton in that painter’s2 studio. Because such things are fairly difficult to find, I asked him whether he’d give it to me for a day or two in order to copy it. At first he objected, probably because he thought that I wouldn’t be able to do it or that it would take me too long, but I insisted on having it and he allowed me to. That was last Sunday afternoon, and as soon as I got home I started on it, and on Monday evening it was finished, and to his surprise I brought it back to him on Tuesday morning already and he thought my drawing good, and in fact it isn’t that bad. I’ll profit even more from that man if only he has the time, he’s well informed on some points, especially perspective, and I can anyhow learn a lot from him. Now I must tell you about something else I’ve done. As I told you in a letter, I bought a pair of trousers and a jacket second-hand about a month ago. It turned out so well that I bought another jacket and another pair of trousers from the same man. I was of course more or less provided for by the first one, but having two suits is actually better and they don’t wear out so fast, because one can alternate between them. I herewith send you a sample of the material. And I also needed to supplement my underclothes with 3 pairs of underwear for which I paid 2. francs apiece, and I also bought a pair of shoes for 4 francs. I really did have to buy a few things. 
   These few things have made a noticeable hole in what was sent for this month, and I’ll have to tighten my belt rather, especially because I paid the painter 5 francs in advance for the lessons. Don’t be concerned about these expenses, though, and don’t suspect me of recklessness, for in fact the opposite is sooner my failing, and if I could spend more I’d easily progress and make headway more quickly. If you could send me some more this month4 without inconveniencing yourselves, I’d like to ask it of you after all. But if you can’t, there’s no immediate hurry, because I mentioned to my landlord5 that I might find it hard to manage this month, and it’s all right with him if I pay him when it suits me, because by now he’s known me long enough not to demand absolutely that I pay in advance, at least not a whole month in advance. As regards that other suit, I have another objective apart from wearing it myself for as long as possible, for the fact is that when it’s a bit older it will serve me in another way. You see, I’ll gradually need a small collection of work-clothes with which to dress the models for my drawings. The blue smock of Brabant, for example, the grey linen suit that the miners wear and their leather hat, also a straw hat and clogs, a fisherman’s costume of brown fustian6 and a sou’wester. And most definitely the clothing made of that kind of black or brown velvet that’s very picturesque and characteristic — furthermore, a red doublet7 or vest. 
   Likewise a couple of women’s costumes, such as that of Kempen8 and the area of Antwerp with the Brabantian cap and that of Blankenberge, for example, or Scheveningen or Katwijk. However, it’s by no means my plan to buy all of this at once, but most certainly to gather this and that gradually, piece by piece, when the opportunity arises. And because one can obtain these clothes second-hand, it’s not wholly unattainable. And all of this can get well and truly underway only when I have some kind of studio somewhere permanent. This is the only true way to succeed, by drawing from a model with the necessary costumes. Only if I pursue drawing this thoroughly and seriously, always seeking to portray reality, shall I succeed, and then, despite the inevitable expenses, a living can be made out of it. Because a good draughtsman can certainly find work nowadays, and there’s a great demand for such individuals and there are positions to be had that pay very well. So the thing is to try and become as good at it as possible. In Paris there are many draughtsmen who earn 10 or 15 francs a day, and in London and elsewhere just as much or even more, but one can’t achieve this all at once and I am by no means that far, but it could well come to that if I’m a little blessed and come again into contact with people like Mr Tersteeg and Theo and, more specifically, with good painters and draughtsmen. But only on the condition that a great deal of work and study be done. It won’t surprise you if I tell you that I’m extraordinarily eager to know what Theo’s proposal could possibly be, or perhaps to hear something from Mr Tersteeg. Because one way or another I must know anyway sometime in the month of March 
   where I stand and how and where I’ll be able to work during the spring and summer months. And should I gradually begin to earn some money, that wouldn’t be disagreeable at all, even though the main thing is that I progress and become better at drawing. Then much will fall into place later on, whether it takes a long time or not. Models are expensive, relatively expensive at any rate, and if I could pay them and use them often I’d be able to work much better. But a studio then becomes indispensable. And people like Mr Tersteeg and Theo and others know this very well. Anyway, I’ll have to wait until they write about one thing and another, and meanwhile do what I can. Made a drawing of miners in the snow that’s a little better than the one from last winter, it has more character and effect. Am also collecting wood engravings again in the manner of those scrapbooks that Theo and Willemien used to have. For if I have that a bit more complete I may well profit by it, for it could very well be that one day I’ll do work for wood engravings. I want you to know that those clothes I bought are well cut and look better on me than anything else I can remember. I tell you this because you might think they were tawdry or out of the ordinary. This material is worn often, especially in the studios. And now I’ll close, after sending my regards to everyone and after congratulating you on Anna’s birthday, and believe me Your loving Vincent At the moment that painter with whom I now take lessons is making a very good painting of a Blankenberge fisherman, among other things. Etten, 12 Oct. 1881. My dear Rappard, I just received ‘Gavarni, l’homme et l’oeuvre’, accept my thanks for returning it. In my opinion, Gavarni is a very great artist, and certainly very interesting as a human being as well. Without doubt, at times he did things that weren’t good, his behaviour towards Thackeray and Dickens, to name but a few, but there are such things in all characters. And he, too, seems to have regretted it, because later he sent drawings to those people whom he had once treated with insufficient cordiality. And Thackeray himself adopted a similar attitude towards Balzac, and went even further, I believe, but that doesn’t alter the fact that at bottom those men were kindred spirits, even though this wasn’t always clear to them. When I received the book this morning, I thought ‘now he certainly won’t come himself, otherwise he’d have kept it until he came’. I don’t need to assure you once more that all of us here would very much like to see you again, and hope so much that, even if you don’t come for long, you won’t stay away entirely. I’m very eager to hear about your plans for the winter. Supposing you go to Antwerp, Brussels or Paris, be sure to come and visit us on your way, and if you stay in Holland then I won’t give up hope either; it’s also beautiful here in the winter, and we surely could do something, if not outdoors then working from a model in the house of some peasant or other. I’ve been drawing a lot from the model lately, since I’ve found a couple of models who are willing enough. And I have all kinds of studies of diggers, sowers &c., men and women. I’m working a lot with charcoal and Conté at the moment, and have also tried sepia and watercolour. Anyway, I can’t say whether you’d see improvement in my drawings, but most certainly a change. 
   I hope to visit Mauve again soon to discuss the question of whether or not I should start painting. If I start, I’ll also persevere. I’ll talk it over again with various people before I begin, though. I realize more and more as time goes on that it was good that I set my mind more specifically on figure drawing. Indirectly, this really does influence landscape drawing as well, because one learns to concentrate. I’d send you a couple of sketches if I had the time, but I’m very occupied with all kinds of things, though later you’ll receive some more. Should you not stay in the country, I’d be pleased to have your address. In any case, I’ll have more to write to you this winter. Do you mind if I keep Karl Robert, Le fusain, for a while longer? It’s because, working with charcoal now, I still need it so much, but if I go to The Hague I’ll see to it that I get one myself. It would surprise me very much if I weren’t to stay in Etten this winter — this is my plan at least, anyway not to go abroad. Because I’ve been rather fortunate since coming back here to Holland, not only in drawing but in other things as well. Anyway, I’ll carry on here for a while, I spent so many years abroad, in England as well as in France and Belgium, that it’s high time I stayed here for a while. You know what’s absolutely beautiful these days, the road to the station and to Leur with the old pollard willows, you have a sepia of it yourself. I can’t tell you how beautiful those trees are now. Made around 7 large studies of several of the trunks.  I’m absolutely certain that if you were here now when the leaves are falling, even if only 
   for a week, you would make something beautiful of it. If you feel like coming, it would give all of us here pleasure. Accept my parents’ warm regards and a handshake in thought from me, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Etten, 15 Oct. 1881. My dear friend Rappard, Your letter, in my opinion, must be answered at once. First of all, let me tell you that it interests me very much — more than any other letter I’ve received from you — I infer more from it than you imagine you put into it. I take it to mean: ‘my friend Rappard has taken a big step forward or will do so shortly’. In what way? Well, it doesn’t matter now, but I have my reasons for thinking that you’ve arrived at a point of revolution and reform. It’ll go well!1 The flames of enthusiasm will be burning in you before long! It’ll go well. For the moment, no more mention of it in this letter. But if you should be amazed at what I said to you, I hope to tell you more in person before too long. Because in any case I hope to see you soon, whether you come by way of Breda or whether you come by way of Roosendaal. First of all, on behalf of my parents, I ask you to try and come one day soon, for a longer or shorter period, and pay us a visit. So there’s no need for you to ask if it’s convenient, but if you do indeed come, you only have to write, I’m coming then or then on this or that train. If it’s impossible for you to come, I definitely count on your stopping over till the next train, whether at the station in Breda or the station in Roosendaal, and on your writing a letter or postcard to tell me the time and place of your arrival. In that case I’ll come to the assigned place. And I’ll bring some drawings along, the large one of ‘Worn out’4 and several others that you don’t know at all. I needn’t tell you that I hope that for your part you’ll take the opportunity to show me some of your watercolours, which I’m extremely curious to see. 
   You see, we must definitely arrange to meet each other one way or the other in the coming days. There’s one thing that could prevent me from coming to the station on the day you travel, but it’s very unlikely that it will fall exactly on the same day. I must tell you that Mauve will be going to Princenhage for a day, and after that coming here for a day. Which will happen one of these days, we hope, though we still don’t know which day. And if Mauve is here, I’ll go where Mauve goes. Suppose you happened to be staying with us when Mauve was here, would you find that so disagreeable? I think not, whether you already know Mauve personally I don’t know, but a meeting or reunion with him would be good, it seems to me. Mauve gave me encouragement recently when I needed it. He’s a man of genius. So now you’re thinking seriously of going to Brussels until Christmas to paint the nude. Well, I find that understandable in your case, and especially in your present mood, I look upon your going very calmly and confidently. Things will go as they should. Whether you go to Brussels or whether you don’t, something new will ignite in you. It’ll be fine, and your going or not going to Brussels will make little difference one way or the other, but the caterpillar will become a butterfly. I’m speaking as your companion in misfortune. I mean you don’t have to think that a stay of a few days in Etten would be neglect of duty, on the contrary, you can easily take it to be devotion to duty, for neither you nor I would sit about with idle hands. 
   You can also draw figures here if you will. I don’t know if I told you that my uncle at Princenhage saw the sketches in your letter and thought them very good, and was pleased that you’re making progress with both figures and landscape. It’s my view, Rappard, that you must nevertheless work especially from a clothed model. One must have a thorough understanding of the nude, that’s indispensable, and yet in reality we’re always confronted with clothed figures. Unless you were intending to follow in the tracks of Baudry, Lefebvre, Henner and so many others who are specialized in the nude. In that case you must study the nude almost exclusively; in that case, the more you focus almost exclusively on it and concentrate on it, the better. But I really don’t think that you’ll take that path. You have too much feeling for other things, a woman gathering potatoes in the field, a digger, a sower, a lady in the street or at home, you find them all too beautiful not to get around to attacking them, in a completely different way than you have up to now. You have too much feeling for colour, too much sentiment for tone, you’re too much of a landscapist to follow in the footsteps of Baudry. The more so because I believe that you, Rappard, will end up settling in Holland. You’re too much of a Dutchman to become a Baudry. But that you paint such beautiful studies of nudes as the two large ones that I know of yours, that recumbent pose and that brown, seated figure, this I think excellent, and I wish that I’d done them. 
   I’m telling you my thoughts frankly, and for your part you, too, must always tell me yours frankly. Your comment on that figure of the sower — of which you said, it’s not a man sowing but a man posing as a sower — is very true. I consider my current studies, however, to be studies from a model, they have no pretension of being anything else. Only in a year or two will I get down to making a sower who is sowing, I agree with you there. You say, Rappard, that you’ve done next to nothing for a fortnight. I know those fortnights well, I also had them this summer. At the time I did nothing with drawing directly — what I did, I did indirectly, those are periods of transformation. I saw the Mesdag Panorama, I was there with the painter De Bock who collaborated on it, and he told me about an incident that I found rather amusing that took place after the panorama had been finished. Perhaps you know the painter Destrée. Just between you and me, he’s the incarnation of mealy-mouthed pedantry. Well — this gentleman went to see De Bock one day and said to him very superciliously, very mealy-mouthed, very pedantically, with a patronizing air, ‘De Bock, they also asked me to help paint that panorama, but because it’s unartistic I refused’. To which De Bock replied: ‘Mr Destrée, what is easier, helping to paint a panorama or refusing to paint a panorama? What is more artistic, doing something or not doing it?’ I found that reply very much to the point. I have good news from my brother Theo, he sends you his regards. Be sure and keep up your acquaintance with him by writing to him occasionally. He’s a clever, energetic chap, it’s a great pity, I think, that he’s not a painter, but it’s good for the painters that there are people like him. You’ll surely discover this if you keep up your acquaintance with him. And now I’ll just say: goodbye for now, isn’t that so? And believe me, with a handshake in thought Ever yours, Vincent I’m looking for a poem, I think it’s by Tom Hood, ‘The song of the shirt’, do you know it perhaps, or could you manage to get hold of it? If you know it, I’d like to ask you to write it down for me. 
   Having sealed this letter, I’m opening it up to tell you that although I can well understand that you’ve conceived this plan, I’d like nonetheless to suggest that you reconsider before going ahead and implementing it. Speaking from the heart, I say: ‘Rappard, stay here’. Of course there may be reasons I’m unaware of that are important enough to make you resolve upon that plan. That’s why I say it only from an artistic standpoint, that in my opinion you as a Dutchman will be better off with a Dutch viewpoint and will have more satisfaction if you work from nature here in the country (whether it be figures or landscape) than if you were to devote yourself to specializing in the nude. 
   Even though I like Baudry and others, such as Lefebvre and Henner, in fact I greatly prefer Jules Breton, Feyen-Perrin, Millet, Ulysse Butin, Mauve, Artz, Israëls &c. &c. And it’s expressly because I truly think that this is essentially your own view too that I’m speaking about it like this. Although you’ve seen much, it’s certain that I’ve seen no less, at any rate, of all kinds of art than you have. For this very reason, because even though I’m a comparative beginner as a draughtsman I nevertheless have a broad view of art in general, you mustn’t take it too lightly if I sometimes say a thing or two. And in my opinion you and I could do no better than to work from Dutch nature (figure and landscape). Then we’re ourselves, then we feel at home, then we’re in our element. The more we know about what’s happening abroad the better, but we mustn’t forget that our roots are in Dutch soil. If I’m not mistaken, you’ve progressed a great deal with your uncle, Mr Lantsheer. I’m glad, at any rate, that he spoke as he did about your painting at Arti. He’s a man of discernment in the field of art, and there aren’t many who have as much knowledge and taste as he does. Etten, 2 Nov. 1881. My dear Rappard, Thanks for your prompt letter, so you quickly succeeded in finding rooms and are living in the neighbourhood of the academy. In response to a certain question that I noticed at the bottom of your postcard, I’d just like to say that, far from finding it ‘stupid’ that you’re attending the aforementioned sanctuary, I think it very wise of you, so wise, in fact, that — well, that I’d almost call it unduly wise and righteous. If you hadn’t gone, if nothing had come of this expedition of yours, all the better, in my opinion, but now that you’ve undertaken it I wish you much success with all my heart, and don’t doubt it will turn out well all the same. In my eyes, you and others like you, even if you’re actually attending the academy, aren’t of course academicians in the detestable sense of the word. That’s to say, I don’t take you for one of those pedantic people who could be called the Pharisees2 of art, of whom père Stallaert3 is one such type4 in my view. And yet even this man might have a good side, and if I knew him better I’d perhaps think differently of His Hon. But it would be difficult to convince me that His Hon. has no damnably bad side that eclipses His Hon.’s possibly good qualities. Nothing is more agreeable to me than to discover good qualities, even in such people. It always hurts me, it always makes me nervous to meet someone and the tenor of his life makes me say ‘but that’s really a bit too bad, that doesn’t stand up to scrutiny’, and that grieved feeling stays with me until one day I find something good in him. You mustn’t think that I enjoy or take pleasure in observing something wrong, it grieves me and causes me so much pain that at times I can’t keep quiet about it. It provokes me. 
    I don’t like to catch myself with ‘a beam in my eye’5 either, and yet – yet sometimes I’ve caught myself with one, and when that happened I didn’t let it stay there but sought a cure. And precisely because I know from personal experience how terrible such a ‘beam in the eye’ is, it doesn’t leave me cold when I see others suffering from the above-mentioned complaint. Do not by any means take me for a headstrong person or partisan. I dare to take sides as much as the next person, sometimes one must do that in life, one must declare oneself and dare to stand up four-square for one’s opinion and stick to it. But considering that I’m utterly determined to see things from the positive, good side in the first place, and to see the bad side only afterwards and with reluctance, I thus take it that even if I haven’t already got it entirely, eventually I’ll succeed in acquiring a generally mild and broad and unprejudiced opinion. And that’s why I consider it one of the petty vexations of human life6 to meet someone who thinks he’s always right and wants to be regarded as someone who’s always right, that’s why, I say, because I’m so very convinced of my own fallibility and also that of all the sons of men. Now as for you, I believe it’s true that you’re also searching for a mild and broad and unprejudiced opinion of the things in life, also more specifically in the artistic sphere. And that’s why I’m far from thinking you a Pharisee, whether morally or artistically. But that doesn’t alter the fact that those like you and I, who have decidedly honest intentions, aren’t perfect and very often make serious mistakes, 
   and are also influenced by those around us and by our circumstances. And would be deceiving ourselves if we thought we had such a firm foothold that we didn’t need to guard against the danger of falling. You and I think we stand firm to a certain extent, but woe betide us if we were to become overconfident and careless because we were certain, and rightly so, of possessing some rather good qualities. Attaching too much importance to the good that is in us, even if it’s truly present, will lead us to Pharisaism. When you make strong studies of nudes, whether at the academy or elsewhere, like those of yours that I’ve seen, when I draw diggers in the potato field, those are good things of ours, and we’ll progress thereby. But in my opinion, despite that, we must nevertheless have misgivings about ourselves and be on our guard against ourselves when we sense we’re on the right path. Then we must say: by all means let me take care because I’m just the sort of man to spoil things for myself when they’re going well unless I take care. Now how should we take care??? I can’t say exactly, but that it’s necessary to take care in the aforementioned case, yes, I do think so, because through my own bitter experience, by learning the hard way, I’ve become aware of what I’ve underlined above. That this awareness of my own fallibility will prevent me from making many mistakes doesn’t alter the fact that I’m bound to make a great many mistakes anyway. But if we fall, we get up again! Now then, I think it very good that you’re painting nudes at the academy, precisely because I trust that you, unlike the Pharisees, won’t think yourself righteous because of it and regard those who think otherwise as contemptible. Not only your words and expressions but, even more so, your work have led me to believe this, and this conviction grows stronger every day. 
   Today I again drew a digger, and since your visit9 a boy cutting grass with a sickle as well. And also a man and woman sitting by the fire. Your visit was very pleasant for all of us, I’m so glad to have seen your watercolours, you’ve made a great deal of progress. But now I wish that you’d also draw or paint ordinary people with clothes on. It wouldn’t surprise me if it came easily to you, I think so often of that reader you drew during the sermon delivered by the Rev. Dr Kam. But since then I haven’t seen any such drawings by you and I really regret that. Have you perhaps converted and do you now listen to the sermon more than you observe the speaker and his congregation? In some cases we can be so carried away by the speaker that we forget everything around us, but is it often like that in church? I wish it were always like that in church. Well, I hope that you’ll write soon and that you’ll have a good stay and success in Brussels. Be sure and stop here on your return journey, let’s agree on that straightaway, if possible. Best regards from my parents and a handshake in thought from me. Believe me always Ever yours, Vincent Etten, 12/9-1881 My dear Rappard, Because I’ve not yet had a letter from you I thought: perhaps Rappard didn’t like my last letter at all, there seems to have been something in it that has made him a little peevish. What to do? Supposing that were so, is it truly good of you? I myself am not always able to judge to what extent my reasoning is right or wrong, appropriate or inappropriate. But I do know this, that even if I occasionally address you in what are possibly coarse and harsh terms, I nevertheless feel such warm sympathy for you that you will surely see and feel when calmly reading or re-reading my letter – the person who speaks to me thus is not my enemy. And knowing this, is it then so utterly unbearable for you to swallow somewhat coarse and harsh expressions even if they later appear to be less coarse and harsh than you at first thought? Rappard, why do you think it is that I speak or write to you as I do? Could it be because I want to lay a trap for you or am a kind of tempter who wants to make you fall into a pit, or could it possibly be that I really had a reason to think ‘Rappard is venturing onto thin ice!’ I now know that there are people who not only maintain their footing on thin ice but even manage to perform tours de force on it – but even if you stood so firmly in your shoes (I’m not saying that you don’t stand so firmly in them), even then I’d prefer to see such a one walking on a footpath or street. 
   Don’t get angry now – read on – until the end – if you get angry, don’t tear up this letter without reading it – first count to ten. One – two – three &c That’s calming.. something really bad is coming, though! What I want to say is this: Rappard, I believe that even when you’re working at the academy you’re striving to become more and more of a true realist, and at the academy, too, you stick to reality. However, without being aware of it yourself, without knowing it, that academy is a mistress who prevents a more serious, a warmer, a more fertile love from awakening in you. Let the mistress go and fall madly in love with your true love, Dame Nature or Reality. I’ve also fallen in love like that, madly in love with a Dame Nature or Reality, and have felt so happy ever since, even though she’s still resisting me strenuously and doesn’t want me yet, and often raps my knuckles if I dare over-hastily to think of her as mine. So I’m far from saying that I’ve already got her, but I’m courting her and seeking the key to her heart despite the painful knuckle-rapping. Now you don’t have to think that there is but one Dame Nature or Reality, no, that’s only the surname of various sisters, who have a variety of Christian names. So we don’t have to be rivals. Do you understand, my dear chap? Of course it’s purely artistic, is it not? 
   Now in my opinion there are two kinds of mistress. One is the kind with whom one can give and take love, one or both of you being aware, meanwhile, that it isn’t forever, neither does one surrender to it whole-heartedly and unreservedly. Such mistresses get on one’s nerves, they coax, they spoil one, then – then — ... they burn up a good many men. The second kind of mistress is of an entirely different disposition. The strait-laced – Pharisees – Jesuits!!! They are the kind of women of marble – sphinx – cold vipers1 — who would like to bind men to themselves, entirely, for ever and ever, without her ever surrendering whole-heartedly, entirely, unreservedly. They suck your blood. Such mistresses freeze men, and petrify them. But I said it was purely artistic, my dear chap – and so I compare the first kind of mistress, those who burn, with that school of art that lapses into generalities. And then I compare the other kind of mistress (the strait-laced), those who freeze and petrify, with academic reality or – or – if you want me to gild the pill, with not unacademic reality – more gilding won’t stick to the pill, I’m afraid you’ll see through it. The pill is bitter, but salutary; it’s a quinine pill. Do you understand, my dear chap! Now there are – thank God – other women besides these two kinds – that is the family of Dames Nature and Reality, but it costs a great deal of inner struggle to win one. They demand nothing more nor less than complete surrender of the heart, soul, mind in one certain direction, all the love that’s in us, and then – then – they also give themselves. However, these true Dames Nature, though harmless as doves, are also wise as serpents, and know very well how to distinguish between who is sincere and who is insincere. 
   She renews, she reinvigorates, she gives life! This Dame Nature, this Dame Reality. Rappard, there are people, and perhaps you and I are such, who don’t understand, until they really love, that before that time, consciously or unconsciously, they’ve had mistresses of one or other of these dispositions, or perhaps aren’t unacquainted with both varieties. You have, in my opinion, a mistress who freezes you, petrifies you and sucks your blood. So, friend, I say you must tear yourself from the arms of that woman of marble (or is it but plaster??? how horrible!), otherwise you’ll freeze to death! Believe, meanwhile, that if I’m a tempter who wants to pull you down into a deep pit, this pit could be the ‘well of truth’. In short – no longer sing the praises of not unacademic mistress (artistically)! In my opinion she’s a shrew. My dear chap, it’s my opinion that she’ll deceive you if you allow yourself to be taken in. The devil with her! Send her packing, and the sooner the better! But it’s purely artistic, is it not — my dear chap? Indeed it is! If, apart from and in addition to that, it was something else altogether — so much the better — I’m not eating my words. As long, that is, as you’d take my words in a non-figurative sense. Do you understand, my dear chap, and — and — tell me — will you write to me now, the sooner the better, eh? Believe me always, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent I recently made a drawing, Mealtime, a worker drinking a cup of coffee and cutting a slice of bread. On the ground a spade he’s brought in from the field. 
   She’s a little cold, though, my dear chap, the one that you say you love, the one who is your ideal for the time being. She is indeed as I had pictured her — marble, plaster, what can I say — a sleep-walker, at most. Alive — no. 

So you say:
 


where does she come from?... From heaven.


Where does she live? All over the world. 


Her intentions? The beautiful and the sublime.


 But, look, you’re sincere at least, and without knowing it you’re fully in agreement with me in that you admit to having a mistress. One of those whom I’ve dubbed strait-laced prudes &c. &c.   That’s just it, you describe her very well. But what a Pharisee she is, that beauty, and you, you’re so in love with her, what a pity! Madame, who are you? I am ‘the beautiful, the sublime’. Tell me, though, my beautiful and sublime, the one who feels herself such, is she so in fact? I certainly agree that in some of life’s crises, in great pain, in transports of joy, one may feel oneself beautiful and sublime, and of course I hope to be among those who know how to appreciate those things. But the fact remains that You, Madame, leave me cold and without any emotion whatsoever. How does that come about?  I don’t, after all, have too thick a skin, I do hope; people who weren’t even pretty, not exactly sublime, have often charmed me, but you, Madame, do not charm me in the very least. One doesn’t make a profession of the beautiful and the sublime!  Madame, I do not love you, and what’s more, I do not believe that you yourself could love unless in certain academic heavens, of course — but on the heath or in private, by the fireside, no, not at all. Don’t sing me that tune, Madame the beautiful, the sublime, you don’t know the first thing about it.
   Do you see, Madame, I’m just a man of human passions, and for as long as I walk ‘down here’ on the heath, I don’t have time to worry about a celestial, mystical love, as long as I feel another, of a more frank and earthly nature. I do need the beautiful and the sublime, I admit it, but first of all I also need something other than that — to start with — kindness and good will, tenderness; do you have much of those, Madame Pharisee? I’m inclined to doubt it. And, Madame, tell me, do you actually have a body and soul? I’m inclined to doubt it; as much, indeed, for the body as for the soul.  Listen, my lovely one, from wherever you may claim to come, you who say your fundamental intentions are ‘the beautiful and the sublime’ (which could only be results, never intentions), from wherever you may come, I say, it’s surely not from the Bosom of the living God, and it’s not from the bosom of a woman, either. Away with you, Sphinx, clear off, and the sooner the better — I tell you — you’re nothing but a joke. You don’t exist. (De debil ton’t exeest, Nucingen would say.)5 However, if you do exist, if in fact you come from somewhere, are you quite sure and certain that your origin isn’t Satan himself, father of lies? Are you any less a viper and a serpent than he, Madame, the beautiful, the sublime?  To say that as far as I’m concerned your mistress, ‘the beautiful, the sublime, who says she comes from heaven and lives over all the earth’, is a more than suspect person, that wouldn’t be putting things strongly enough.  Ask her if she’s good and useful, if she loves, and needs love. She’ll become flustered, and if she says yes, it’s a lie. 
       She – the other one, that is, not the one with the above-mentioned ‘intentions’, where does she come from?
I’m far from denying her divinity, her  immortality; I believe in it very firmly, and in the first place, even;  however, she’s definitely earthly, too, and definitely a woman,and born of a woman.
    She?– Where she lives, I know well where, and it’s not very far from each one of us.
    She– Her intentions? What do I know of them, how  to say it — I’d like to keep silent — however, since we must speak —  ah, well — it seems to me: to love and to be lovably — to live, to  give life, to renew it, to heal it, to preserve it, to work, to give  back spark for spark; above all, to be good, to be useful — to be of  some use, to light the fire, for example, to give a child a piece of  bread and butter, a sick man a glass of water.
    Ah, but all that is very beautiful, very sublime.  Yes, but she didn’t know that it was called that, she believed that it  was quite simple, she doesn’t do it on purpose, it wasn’t her intention to make as much noise as that, she believed nobody paid attention
    Her own ‘arguments’, you see, aren’t very brilliant, not very well thought out. Her sentiment is always right.
    To know what her duty is she doesn’t go to her head, she goes to her heart. But she’s in no way a mistress, that one. Since a lady is a lady, as Michelet says. 
   Meanwhile, Rappard, that business of the competition I find rather amusing. No. 11 is first of all the fool’s number and, moreover, ‘last’ is also a good sign sometimes, so I offer you my sincere congratulations, for in my opinion one thing and another are good omens for you. It’s promising. Now, I still have quite a lot against various principles of yours too, but because my bête noire9 in the circumstances is that particular mistress, I’ll leave the principles alone. If you could sack Mme the beautiful, the sublime, and fall in love with ‘the other’, it seems to me that that would put entirely different principles in your head and in your heart. And I perceive from certain signs that, no matter how much you’re still attached to Mme the beautiful and sublime, you won’t be able to stand her much longer. Unless she petrifies you and turns you to ice and transfixes you in that way, but that seems unlikely to me, you have too much good sense for that. Be on your guard — keep warm — you know — (a little precaution to take against her chilling influence), and take lots of walks — (especially when you feel a little petrification coming on). Forewarned is forearmed, so you’re forewarned, then. Don’t be annoyed with me; if it wasn’t an academic expression, I would say, ‘it’s for your own good’.   Finally, much good may it do you, I have another bête noire to hunt down, but I shan’t tell you which, now. But listen, and I’ll tell you anyway. This other bête noire is ‘resignation in disappointments’. Another incredibly Jesuitical, Pharisaical invention. But that’s theological, very theological. My dear chap, never resign yourself and never be disappointed, that’s the best advice I could give you, it’s even better than my advice to send your cold mistress to the devil, all the more so since these two pieces of advice amount to only one. I shake your hand, believe me always Ever yours, Vincent Etten, 21 Nov. 1881. My dear Rappard. To speak less abstractly for once, I’d like to discuss several matters with you this time. You say Ten Cate1 spoke to you about the same things I did. Be that as it may, but if Mr Ten Cate is the person I saw very briefly in your studio one day, then I most seriously doubt whether he and I have at bottom exactly the same thoughts. Is he small of stature, with black or at least dark hair and a rather pale complexion, and very smartly dressed completely in black worsted, at least on the occasion that I saw him?  I should tell you that I’m used to paying very close attention to the outward appearance of people if I want to work out how they actually think. But Mr Ten C. is someone I saw but once and only very briefly, if indeed he was the one I saw, and so I can’t really take the measure of him. Still, it may be that he spoke to you in some respects as I did. I have nothing against that, all the better. Your answer to my letter is actually only half an answer, but I thank you for it anyway. You’ll no doubt tell me the other half sometime, but not just yet. The other, still-to-come half is longer than the first, already-received half and much more satisfactory.b Assuming that sooner or later you’ll leave the academy for good, I imagine that you’ll have to wrestle with a very singular problem which is far from unfamiliar to you, even now. Someone who works regularly at the academy as you do must feel rather out of his element when, instead of knowing in advance, today I have to do this or that, he must daily improvise or rather create his working environment. Looking for and finding work isn’t at all easy, especially in the long run. At any rate, it wouldn’t surprise me if, when you’ve finally left the academy for good, you occasionally felt as though the ground were being cut from under your feet. But you’re not the kind of man, I think, to let yourself be dismayed by this natural phenomenon, and you’ll soon recover your equilibrium. 
   Then, however, when you plunge once and for all (for once you’ve taken the plunge, you’ll never go back), head over heels and whole-heartedly into reality, you’ll talk exactly as Ten Cate does and exactly as I do to others who still stick to the academy. Because from what you’ve told me about Mr Ten Cate I think that the arguments he presented to you can be reduced to these words: Rappard, don’t hold back, plunge head over heels into reality. That open sea is your native element, and even at the academy you can’t deny your true character and nature, and that’s why the gentlemen there don’t really recognize you and fob you off. This doesn’t mean that Mr Ten Cate, and this applies even more to me, can handle the sea and can yet move and manoeuvre as we’d like, but if we don’t drown or get battered against the rocks by the breakers, we’ll become able seamen all the same. And there’s no mercy, everyone who launches out into the deep2 has to go through a time of drudgery and toil. We start out catching few or no fish, but we get to know the waters and how to steer our boat, and that’s already something vital. And after a while we catch a lot of fish, and big ones too! I think, though, that Mr Ten Cate probably fishes for a different kind of fish than I do, because our temperaments are different, I believe, for each fisherman is permitted to make his forte what he likes, but fish of one sort can’t help going into the other net and the other sort into the first one, and so his catch and mine may sometimes overlap. From time to time you might dislike sowers and seamstresses and diggers. That may well be. So do I. But ‘sometimes disliking’ is in my case far outweighed by a certain enthusiasm, whereas in your case they seem to carry equal weight. 
   Have you saved my epistles? If you have a moment and they haven’t yet perished in the flames, read them again, I say, though perhaps it’s pretentious to ask such a thing of you. Still, I wrote them in earnest, though I didn’t hesitate to speak plainly and to give free rein to my imagination. Now you’ll say that I’m actually a headstrong person and that I’m in fact preaching a doctrine. Well, if you want to take it that way, so be it, I don’t necessarily have anything against it, I’m not ashamed of my feelings, I’m not ashamed of being a man, of having principles and faith. But where do I want to drive people, especially myself? To the open sea. And which doctrine do I preach? People, let us surrender our souls to our cause and let us work with our heart and love what we love. Love what we love, what an unnecessary warning that seems, and yet how great a raison d’être. After all, how many people expend their best efforts on something that isn’t worthy of their best efforts, and treat what they love in a ‘stepmotherly’ fashion instead of giving themselves openly to the irresistible urging of their heart. And we even think that behaviour such as the above shows ‘firmness of character’ and ‘strength of mind’, and we expend our efforts on an unworthy one and neglect our true lass. And all of that with ‘the most sacred of intentions’ and ‘thinking we must do it’ from a ‘moral conviction’ and ‘sense of duty’. Thus we have ‘the beam in our own eye’, confusing a seeming or would-be conscience with our real conscience. The person who is now writing to his dear friend Rappard has long gone through the world with one – perhaps even more than one – such object, though of monstrous size, in his eye. Is that beam now gone? you ask. Well, how should the present writer answer you? He knows one thing, that one very large beam is temporarily gone, but precisely because he didn’t notice it when 
   he was labouring under it, he considers it not impossible that there might be more whose existence or otherwise might not be completely clear to him as yet. However, the present person has learned to be on the qui vive for eye complaints, eye beams. The exceptionally large beam in question was of a rather unartistic nature. I won’t tell you on this occasion what kind it was. For there are all manner of ‘eye beams’, artistic, theological, moral eye beams (very frequent), practical eye beams and theoretical eye beams (sometimes in combination, very fatal!) and, well, many, many more. So we needn’t be too dismayed if we aren’t without them, provided we don’t take ‘not being too dismayed’ so far that it becomes carelessness or indifference or obduracy on that score. I recently received a nice letter from my brother Theo, who also asked after you. I had sent him a few drawings and he strongly advised me to go on with those Brabant types. What he says about art is always powerful, and he often has tips that are both practical and workable. Today I again pursued a certain ‘bête noire’ of mine, namely the resignation method. That ‘bête noire’ is of the hydra variety, I believe, which is to say the more serpent heads one chops off the more new ones sprout. Yet there are men who have succeeded in killing such a ‘bête noire’. That’s always my favourite occupation whenever I can find half an hour for it, to fight that old ‘bête noire’ again. But perhaps you didn’t even know that theology has a resignation system with a side branch of mortification. And if this were but a matter that existed only in the imagination and in the writings and sermons of theologians, then I wouldn’t bother about it, but sadly it’s one of those burdens grievous to be borne which certain theologians place around people’s necks and do not touch with one of their fingers, so unfortunately such resignation belongs to the sphere of reality and causes many large and petty miseries of human life. But when they wanted to strap that yoke to me I said: go to hell! And they found that very disrespectful. Well then, so be it. No matter what the raison d’être of resignation, it, namely resignation, is for those who can resign themselves and faith for those who can believe. And what else can I do if I wasn’t born for the first, namely resignation, but for the second, namely faith and all it entails? Well, write again when you have a moment, believe me meanwhile, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent  23 November 1881 My dear Rappard, When I re-read your letters, old chap, I find such good, nice remarks in them, and, you see, that’s precisely what spurs me on to keep up this correspondence. Aha! So I’m actually a headstrong person after all! Well, I’ll admit defeat, you’ve stung me to the quick! So be it. I thank you for that revelation, yes, thank God, at first I didn’t dare believe it myself but you’ve made it clear to me, so I have a will, an inclination, I’m going in a definite direction, and, what’s more, not satisfied with that, I want others to go with me! Thank God, so I’m a headstrong person! Well, from now on I want to be nothing else. And now I’d really like to have my friend Rappard as my travelling companion – it’s not a matter of indifference to me to lose sight of him – am I wrong about that? Well, I was saying, in my haste, that I wanted to drive people ‘to the open sea’ (see previous letter). If that’s all I did I would be a terrible barbarian. But there’s something else that makes the matter more reasonable. A man can’t stand it on the open sea for long – he has to have a little hut on the beach with a fire on the hearth – with a wife and children around that hearth. You see, Rappard, where I myself seek to go, whither I seek to push others as well, is to become fishermen in the sea that we call the ocean of reality, but for myself, and for those fellow human beings I sometimes buttonhole, I definitely want ‘that little hut’ as well. And in that little hut the above-mentioned things. So the sea and that haven, or that haven and the sea. And as regards that doctrine I’m preaching. That tenet of mine, ‘people, let us love what we love’, is based on an axiom. I thought it unnecessary to mention that axiom, but now for the sake of clarity I’ll spell it out. That axiom is ‘People, we love’. From that I derive the first proposition. People, let us love what we love, let us be ourselves, ‘let us not want to know better than God’. (‘Let us not want to know better than God’ is not an expression of mine but of Mauve’s.)2
   And I’ll prove that proposition with a reductio ad absurdum, namely in this way. To begin with, suppose a man didn’t love what he loved, how much misery he would cause himself and others, and how much trouble he would stir up in the world of our blessed Lord. In short, if everyone were like that person of whom we assume for the moment — if it’s possible for us to do so, that is — that he didn’t love what he loved, how the world would gradually (which in my view was ordained uprightly by our blessed Lord, and is maintained in that position by Him, and for the time being, for at least as long as you and I shall live, will stay in that position, it will no doubt last out our time), if, I say, everyone were like that supposed man, intentionally standing upside down and turned inside out (it’s fortunate that he can exist only in our imagination as an abstraction in our reductio ad absurdum of an ungeometric proposition!), how the world rightly created by God would start to look very like a totally wrong world. It seems to me, starting off with that as an abstraction, that the person in question, intentionally standing upside down and turned inside out, existing for the moment only in our imagination (and not even that), who wouldn’t choose to love what he loved, we feel to be going so much ‘against the grain’ that we may in fact take as proved the logic or the reasonableness of the proposition ‘people, let us love what we love’. (Moreover, if I haven’t proved clearly enough that the falseness of the proposition in question is a great absurdity, you, who are much further along in geometry than I am, would — with a bit of good will — easily succeed in finding more conclusive proof of my proposition.) We now come to remarkable conclusions or ‘consequences’ of this basic principle, which include, First, a man who flatly refuses to love what he loves drives himself into the ground. Second, he’d have to have a very strong dose of O/Abstinence (the O and the A are both applicable, coincidentally. Eh!) to stand it for long. Third, if he were to change, his conversion wouldn’t be great. 
   Yes, and whether I say it or don’t say it, I think you’ll understand in any case that I’m more or less insinuating: Rappard, that by sticking so close to the academy you’re keeping a spare turn of rope around your arm with which many a man has ‘hanged’ himself – because he couldn’t be free of it when he wanted to choose the sea! Because you, though, have rather strong muscles, you will be able to break that spare turn of rope in time of need. But others! Believe me, there are those who hang themselves with it! Are there, in addition to ‘academic’ ones, yet other ‘turns of rope’? There are, by your leave, as many kinds of turns of rope as there are eye beams. (See chapter on ‘eye beams’ in previous letter.) How many? ‘Legion’, I say, ‘Legion’. ‘Hanging oneself’ by the ‘spare turn of rope’ is a much more protracted and fearful death than hanging oneself straightforwardly with a noose. Are there also moral turns of rope? And why shouldn’t they be just as good as moral eye beams? But you and I haven’t really laboured under them, nor do we labour under them, nor shall we labour under them. Hmm — I’m not so very sure of that, and if instead of speaking of you and me I were speaking of myself alone, I’d say: as far as I’m concerned, I have laboured under, am labouring under, shall continue to labour under moral eye beams and moral turns of rope, but that did not, does not and will not alter the fact that I have cast out, am casting out and shall continue to cast out moral eye beams from my eye. And moral turns of rope I have rent asunder, am rending asunder and shall continue to rend asunder with flashes of lightning. Until at the end I’ll stand with a single eye4 and a free arm. When?  Provided I persevere until the end – in the end. 
   Well, you will indeed see that together we’ll win this by persevering with our correspondence, that this correspondence will gradually become more serious. Because although, as I’ve already said, I’m giving free rein to my imagination, I’m nevertheless writing to you truly, not without but very much with earnestness. And, while far from writing to you out of any desire to argue, my intention nonetheless is: ‘to wake Rappard up’, and I doubt whether in that ‘waking of Rappard’ I’ll nod off myself. God forbid that such would be the case, far from it. I told you on a previous occasion that I generally scrutinize, with artists in particular, the man who produces the work just as much as the work itself. Lacking the man, I must sometimes draw conclusions from the work alone (we can’t know all artists personally), lacking the work, I must take the measure of the man alone. Well, of a certain Mr van Rappard I know, first, his work to some extent, second, him to some extent. His work always says to me, hereafter better. His person says the same. From good to better. Do you think that a very unmerciful judgement? Now (turning to a completely different subject), as regards my special ‘bête noire’, I’ve had little opportunity today to occupy myself with pursuit of the same; even so, I couldn’t refrain from attacking it just for a bit. But we’ll discuss this in more detail at some point. It’s beginning, however, to be slightly on the qui vive, the fact is that resignation is accustomed to resignation and, I thought, it would give up the fight, but you see, I’m not inclined to do it yet. Anyway, perhaps I’ll tell you later about the bête noire in question. Bloody bête noire! It does me good all the same. Meanwhile, believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent I’m now writing to you often because I’ll soon have a lot of other correspondence. The Hague, 30 Dec. 1881. My dear Rappard, I received your letter from Brussels. I don’t like it at all, but still, you wrote it at a time when, as you yourself say, you weren’t quite normal. Nothing or next to nothing in your letter holds water. I’m glad you’re back from Brussels. Still, you don’t belong there in my opinion, and as regards the ‘technical competence’ you hope to gain at the Academy, you will, I fear, end up being deceived. Even that can’t be learned from people like Stallaert. But now I’m busy with all kinds of work, for I’ve rented a small studio here and will be moving into it around 1 January and still have a lot of things to see to. Later, when things have quietened down a bit, I’ll write to you again calmly about this and that, but don’t take offence if I’ve got more serious things to do now than write letters. Of course my letters don’t pretend always to hit the mark, always to explain things precisely, oh no, I’m often wrong about things. But if I tell you, 
  Rappard, those academics you worry about aren’t worth tuppence, and I’m referring to Stallaert and Severdonck2 &c., I mean it with all my heart, and I’m telling you, if I were you I’d forget about them. But I’ve already told you this a couple of times, I won’t say it again, I don’t want to hear another syllable or utter another syllable about the whole academy ever again. It isn’t worth the bother. And I hereby send you my regards – what kind of people are they, those artists with whom you drank Lambiek? Why don’t you mention even a couple of them by name? Are they people who’ll be of any use to you? I hope so, for your sake, but I seriously doubt it. Good-day, old chap, I have no more time, nor any desire, to write more. When you’re in your studio, work often with a model, you’ll get more satisfaction from it in the long run. Anyway – good-day. Vincent 
   Should you want to write to me again, send your letters to Etten. They’ll send them on – I’m wavering between 2 or 3 studios and will decide which one to take before 1 January, but at the moment I don’t have a fixed address, you’ll learn of it at some point. I left Etten because I was having too much trouble with my father about all sorts of things that actually aren’t worth talking about – about going to church &c. &c., and even if I worked hard and a great deal, it put me in a state of weariness and coldness that’s not good for anything. So I’ve settled down here and am glad to be in different surroundings. I have a few worries, but that’s better than all that quarrelling and nagging. Sunday evening. Schenkweg 138 My dear friend Rappard, Thanks to you know what, I’ve just been packing my drawings for Amsterdam. There are now 7 in all. The larger of the 2 courtyards2 is now completely flat as a result of being mounted on Bristol, and the lines have become much more rapid. Then there’s the nursery:3 to that I’ve done what you said, namely looked more closely at the side with the ditch and the water in the foreground, and only now does that show up well and expresses, I think, ‘spring’ and a gentle stillness. As for the one of the carpenter’s shed from the window of my studio, I’ve added a new black by working on it in pen, and now ‘the sun shines’ because the lights stand out more strongly. Today I made an early start because I wanted to do another one the same, and went to the dunes to draw a fish-drying barn, also seen from a height5 like the carpenter’s shed, and now it’s 1 at night but it’s all done thank God, and I can look my fearsome landlord in the eye. And so, it’ll get even better.  I’m so glad to have seen you again, and what you tell me about your work interests me enormously, I assure you. I do so hope that we’ll be able to go on some more walks here in the neighbourhood when the opportunity arises. Because you would certainly find plenty of material in the fish-drying barns in Scheveningen &c., for example. They’re splendidly Ruisdael-like (I mean like that painting, The bleaching grounds at Overveen). But perhaps you know The Hague and Scheveningen better than I do. However, if you don’t know ‘Geest’, ‘Slijkeinde’ &c., namely the Whitechapel of The Hague with all its alleys and courtyards, I commend myself to take you there next time you’re in The Hague. 
   I’ve found another two woodcuts for you, one by Miss Edwards9 and one by Green. The latter is particularly fine: a painter working on a shop sign while people watch, in the age of Louis xvi. I must also have a good Rochussen in duplicate somewhere.  I believe that you could have a much finer collection than mine if you put your mind to it, or perhaps you do already; I’ve never seen all of yours together, only the small Dürers and Holbeins and the Du Mauriers and a few others. If you come across anything interesting in that line, let me know.  Do you know The wayfarers by Fred Walker? It’s a large etching of a blind old man led by a boy along a frozen road, with a ditch with copse-wood covered with glazed frost, and osiers, on a winter evening. It’s certainly one of the most sublime creations in that genre, with an utterly modern, distinctive sentiment, perhaps less robust than Dürer in his Knight, Death and Devil, but perhaps even more intimate, and certainly as original and sincere. It’s a pity that the artists here know so little about the English. Mauve, for example, was enthusiastic when he saw that landscape by Millais, Chill October, but they don’t believe in English art, and judge it too superficially in my view. Mauve always says, ‘That is literary art’, but doesn’t realize that the English writers like Dickens and Eliot and Currer Bell, and among the French Balzac, are so astonishingly ‘plastic’, if I may put it like that, that it’s as powerful as, say, a drawing by Herkomer or Fildes or Israëls. And Dickens himself sometimes used the expression, I have sketched.
   Personally, I detest scepticism as much as sentimentality. I don’t mean to insinuate that artists here are sceptics or cynical, but they often give that impression and have that air, whereas when faced by nature they’re as serious and devout as can be. Well — I often catch myself making the same mistake, and in reaction sometimes lapse more into sentimentality than I intend, so I don’t really have the right to criticize.  How many beautiful things are being lost these days – in the sense of picturesque. I recently read a piece by the son of C. Dickens. He said, if my father were to come back he would find little left of the London that he described – that ‘old London’ is going, being ‘cleared away’. And it’s the same in this part of the world too — the pleasant little courtyards are being replaced by rows of houses. Most unpicturesque, except when they’re in the process of being built: then, with the sheds and scaffolding and workmen, it’s really interesting. For example, there’s a neighbourhood here behind Bazarstraat and Laan van Meerdervoort where I’ve seen wonderful things: sites being levelled or raised, sheds, planks, huts, fences &c. &c., everything you can imagine.  Another pleasing sight here is the soup kitchens, and always, always the 3rd-class waiting room. If I didn’t have to earn a living, that’s to say by drawing those townscapes, I would do only figures in times like these, but as yet I have no one who will buy them, and I still have the costs of a model, although I can often get someone.  I’m happy with the model I have, I mean the woman who was with me when you came, for she’s learning day by day and understands me. If, for example, I get angry because something isn’t working out and I get up and say ‘It isn’t worth a damn’, or even much harsher things than that, she doesn’t take it as an insult, as most people naturally would, but lets me calm down and start again from scratch. And she has the patience to put up with 
   the tedious searching for this or that position or pose. And so I think it’s precious. If I need to have the size of a figure outside or if I’m looking for the position of a figure in a drawing I’m doing out of doors, for instance to see how a figure appears against a fishing pink on the beach and where it catches the light, I have only to say, be at such and such a place at such and such a time, and she’ll be there. I hear gossip about how I’m always together with her, but why should I let that bother me? — I’ve never had such a good assistant as this ugly??? wasted woman. To me she’s beautiful, and I find in her exactly what I need. Life has given her a drubbing, and sorrow and adversity have left their mark on her — now I can make use of it. If the earth hasn’t been ploughed you can’t do anything with it. She has been ploughed — so that in her I find more than in a whole batch of the unploughed. I hope you’ll write soon, and if you agree we must correspond regularly, in so far as our work permits, provided that we warn each other if our ‘practical talk’ lapses into the impractical, without getting angry about such a warning the way Mr Tersteeg did, as I told you.  Tomorrow I hope to go into the dunes again to the same drying barns. I recently read the great work about Millet by his friend Sensier. It’s extremely interesting, and if you haven’t read it I warmly recommend it to you. It has much that only Sensier, as Millet’s intimate friend, could know, and certainly contains new information, at least it was new to me, despite the fact that I had read various things about M. already. Now adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I gratefully enclose the 2. guilders you were good enough to lend me. I’ve had a reply to my drawings, but received even less for them than I expected, although my expectation was no more than 30 guilders for 7 items. I received 20 guilders with a sort of reprimand to boot: ‘did I imagine that such drawings had the least commercial value?’ You must admit that the times aren’t easy, and that such experiences (and there are so many worse things; this is generous compared with other treatment) and, I say, that such experiences aren’t exactly very encouraging.  Art is jealous and demands all our time, all our strength, and then, when you give it all that, you’re made out to be a sort of impractical type3 and I don’t know what else — that leaves a bitter taste.  Well, we must keep hacking our way through. 
   I replied4 that I didn’t pretend to be well-informed as to the commercial value of things, that now that he, as a dealer, told me that they were of no commercial value, I had no desire to contradict or question that, that for my part I attached more importance to the artistic than to the commercial value, and would rather immerse myself in nature than calculate prices. And that when I talked to him about the price and didn’t give him the things for nothing, that was because I, like everyone else, had my basic needs for food, accommodation, &c., and saw it as a duty to ensure that I took care of these relatively minor matters. But that I didn’t want to force my work on His Hon. against his will, and was prepared to send him new drawings if he wanted, but was also prepared to accept the loss of his custom. I have little doubt, though, that my course of action will be viewed as ungrateful, rude and impertinent.  And I’ll be accused as follows, when it suits the purpose: ‘With your pretensions and obstinacy you behaved so ungratefully towards your uncle in Amsterdam, who had your best interests at heart and was so kind to you and helped you so much, that it’s your own fault’ &c. &c. &c. My dear friend Rappard, I really don’t know whether to laugh or weep at this sort of thing. I find it so typical. 
   Of course, the rich dealers are the good, honest, genuine, loyal, sensitive characters, and we poor devils who sit there drawing, whether out of doors, on the street, or in the studio, sometimes in the early morning, sometimes deep at night, sometimes in the heat of the sun, sometimes in the snow, we’re the people without sensitivity, with no understanding of practical matters, without ‘manners’ above all. Fine by me! That uncle of mine in Amsterdam also informed me with considerable aplomb that Degroux was in fact a bad person. You will understand how much this has changed my opinion about père Degroux. All I said to him, to which as yet he has given me no reply, the noble dealer, what I said to him was: ‘It seems to me much less a matter of earning than of deserving.’  Anyway — I mention it to you as a way of opening the safety valve on the machine, otherwise I might remain bitter about the business, and my dearest wish is not to think about it any more and to forget it. But these people begin so kindly and manage to be so winning at first that you’re all the more amazed when you eventually see their true colours. Adieu, thanks again, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Hospital Ward 6, No. 9 24 June My dear friend Rappard This is to thank you for your last letter, which I would certainly have done earlier were it not for the fact I’ve not been my normal self for some time. I must tell you your letter reached me not at my studio but in the hospital, where I’ve been for 3 weeks now. So your letter was doubly welcome at the time, and what you say about the drawings that seem not to have pleased my worthy Uncle gave me double pleasure. Later, however, I heard from someone else that they weren’t so bad and that he hadn’t meant to be so critical. Whatever the case, while I was making those drawings and some more since, of the same sort of fish-drying barns in the dunes for instance, I caught a cold and then had fever and nerves as well, and it seems that one thing and another affected the bladder so that I couldn’t urinate, and in the end I was so anxious and in such pain that I came here. And they rummaged around in my bladder with a catheter and so forth, and now I’m beginning to return to a more normal condition, which pleases me a good deal. But I’m not clear of it yet, and still don’t know whether I’ll be able to go home soon. I hope it will be over within a week, but it will take some time in any event. 
   It’s very pleasant here in the hospital. I’m in a ward with 10 beds, but until today I was unable to draw because I had to lie still, and and even now I’ve made only a very faint and weak beginning and can’t pursue anything or go deeper into things. But I’m allowed in the garden for an hour a day, and there I began scrawling again yesterday. And at least I’m starting to look again, whereas at first I was too miserable even to see.  I’ll have to take things very quietly for a while when I leave here. Oh well. I must say a particular word in praise of the treatment here. If I’m ever taken ill again, I shan’t hesitate for a moment, any more than I do now, before going to the hospital. It’s far more practical, in my view, than lying ill at home, at least in circumstances like mine. I feel as if I’m now almost completely cured, but the problem is that as a result of too much moving and walking &c. I may have a relapse at any moment, which is what happened to me last week; otherwise I would now be well on the way. 
   As soon as I have a few drawings again in a little while, of the fish-drying barns or a courtyard, for instance, I would dearly like to send you something to see if you can place it. But I shan’t be in a hurry, and shall wait until I have one better than average, because I would rather send it to you than to Amsterdam again. Although I do hope Amsterdam will turn out all right again. And we must agree that if you’re unable to place it you mustn’t hesitate to send it back, and mustn’t think I’ll be discouraged, because it won’t work straightaway. So whether it’s the fault of my drawing or the fault of the possible buyer, let the two of us agree that we shan’t immediately let ourselves be frightened off by the failure of the experiment (were it not to succeed). When I’m back at work, I’ll write again soon. Thanks again for your letter — I didn’t want to put off replying to it any longer. Meanwhile believe me Ever yours, Vincent Sunday evening My dear friend Rappard, I was delighted by your letter, which I received yesterday evening. I had already been looking forward to it, but thought you were toiling away somewhere. What you tell me about Drenthe1 is interesting — I don’t know Drenthe at all from having been there myself, only through what Mauve and Ter Meulen, for instance, have brought back. I imagine it as being like North Brabant when I was young, about 20 years ago. I remember as a boy seeing the heath and the small farmhouses, the looms and the spinning wheels exactly as I see them now in drawings by Mauve and Ter Meulen. The part of Brabant I know well has since changed enormously through land reclamation and industry. It isn’t without a certain nostalgia that I now see a new tavern with a red tiled roof at many places where I remember seeing a wattle-and-daub hut with a moss-covered, thatched roof.  Since then have come sugar-beet factories, railways, heath reclamations, &c., which are much less picturesque. Well, what will remain in me is something of the austere poetry of the true heathland. And it seems that the true heath still exists in Drenthe just as it used to in Brabant.  Yet there’s still a great deal of beauty left in Brabant — just think of Het Heike, where we went together.
   I think your sketches in the letter are very good. There’s a lot of character in the churchyard in particular.  As for me, as the result of a visit by my brother, who saw my watercolours, I too am busily painting.  Actually, I don’t believe that anyone seeing my first painted studies would say that they were my first.  For I don’t find it in the least alien, and I’m very interested in it.  Yesterday evening I found an interesting effect in the Rijswijk meadows. Flat green meadows through which a black cinder road passes with a ditch beside it. The sun goes down fiery red — a peasant trudges home — far-off a peasant cottage. I also have a small seascape — and pieces of dune ground — a row of pollard willows, a potato field and so on. I find painting so appealing that I’ll have to make a great effort not to paint all the time. It’s rather more manly than watercolour, and has more poetry to it.  You probably know that at present there’s an exhibition here by the Dutch Drawing Society. There are some truly beautiful things.  There’s a woman at the loom by Mauve9 that I can’t get out of my head. An old mother by Israëls10 ditto. Neuhuys, Maris, Du Chattel, Ter Meulen14 and a mass of others, not forgetting Weissenbruch. There’s a lovely portrait of Weissenbruch by Israëls; I can’t tell you how lifelike and quintessential it is.
   There’s also a very beautiful large seascape by Mesdag, and two Swiss things by him that I find rather inane, though they have a certain boldness — but not pursued and not felt. But the large seascape is superb.  By Willem Maris a delightful sow with a host of piglets. And a Jaap Maris — a very big townscape20 as strong as Vermeer of Delft. Some time ago there was also an exhibition of French art from private collections21 — Daubigny, Corot, Jules Dupré, Jules Breton, Courbet, Diaz, Jacque, T. Rousseau — which at once stimulated me and yet made me feel a little melancholy, when I thought of how the faithful veterans have vanished one by one. Corot is no more. T. Rousseau, Millet, Daubigny — they’re resting from their work. Jules Breton, Jules Dupré, Jacque, E. Frère, they’re still with us, but how long will they still be going around in their smocks? They’re all already old and have one foot in the grave. And their successors — are they worthy of those first modern masters?  All the more reason to get on with things vigorously and not to slacken. 
   The new studio I have pleases me greatly and I find my subject matter here in the neighbourhood. I sincerely hope you’ll come here sooner or later, and I very much want to see some of your work or hear about it by letter. My brother sends his regards. I told him you were working very busily.  I’m in the same position as you in the sense that I write few letters these days, and indeed am writing in haste now. I wish you well and good fortune in every respect, and believe me, with a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I’m pleased to be able to send you the enclosed woodcuts. You’ll see, though, that these too are rather tattered at the folds. That’s not because of going through the post, but because they were kept for so long in a subscription library. But you’ll be able to glue them together, as I very often have to do myself. Write and tell me whether you have a female figure by Percy Macquoid holding a candle on the stairs of an armoury where the gleam of a suit of armour can be seen. I believe you’ve already had it from me, together with a girl in white leaning against a tree, but if you don’t have it I’ll send it when the opportunity arises. Macquoid is one of the most distinguished of the English illustrators. I think you’ll like the Renouards. I may be able to add some more later, since the Jew4 told me he still had more of that jumble of magazines at home (from which I took these and my own) which he hadn’t brought along because they were too tattered. When I have time I’m going to look through his jumble — which isn’t a pleasant task, by the way.  I think The miners’ strike5 is superb, I believe it will please you too.  I made a big effort to get things with miners — this and an English one of an accident6 are the best — such subjects are rarely handled, by the way. I would like to do studies of them myself sooner or later. 
   Write to me if you would, Rappard, in earnest whether — supposing I were to go for 2 months, say, to the mining region in the Borinage — you would like to go with me.  It’s quite a difficult part of the world — the journey is no pleasure trip — but it’s one of the things I would love to undertake as soon as I feel more confident about making lightning sketches of people in motion — knowing that there are such beautiful things to do there, which as yet have rarely been painted by others, if at all. But because one has to deal with all sorts of difficulties in a region like that, there’s every reason to go together.  At present my circumstances don’t permit it – but this is an idea that’s deeply rooted in me.  I’ve often worked on the beach recently, either drawing or painting. And the sea attracts me more and more.  I don’t know what your experience of getting on with artists here has been like — I’ve found more than once that people began to rail viciously against what they called ‘the illustrative’ in a manner that to me very clearly proved they had no understanding of the matter at all, were completely unaware of what’s going on in that sphere. 
   And were also not to be persuaded, or rather chose not to even take the trouble to look at a few things. Or if they did look, it was in their head for a short time and then straight out again.  Now my experience of you has been that you think differently. I’ve recently found some things by Lançon — a soup distribution, a gathering of rag-pickers, gang of snow-shovellers8 — which made me get up at night to take another look at them, that’s how strong an impression they made on me.  And especially while I myself toil away to make something of the things that interest me more and more on the street, in the 3rd-class waiting room, on the beach, in a hospital, my respect grows for the great portrayers of the people such as, for example, Renouard or Lançon or Doré or Morin or Gavarni or Du Maurier or C. Keene or Howard Pyle or Hopkins or Herkomer and Frank Holl and countless others. Perhaps this has been your experience to some extent too. Well – whatever the case — I find it highly interesting that you’re toiling at various subjects that I also think are most appealing, and sometimes I regret that we live quite far apart and can see relatively little of each other. Well, I haven’t the time to write, accept a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
    Here’s a scratch in great haste of a watercolour I’m working on. My dear friend Rappard, Your letter, very welcome, has just arrived, and I’m answering at once because I’m longing to talk to you again.  You ask: do you have many German things? As it happens, on the subject of Vautier and other Germans1 in a letter to my brother2 about some figure studies I had drawn, I wrote almost exactly the same as what you say. I told him that I’d been to an exhibition of watercolours where there was a great deal by the Italians. Clever, very clever, and yet they left me with an empty feeling, and I said to my brother, old chap, what a pleasant time it was in art when that group of artists from Alsace began, Vautier, Knaus, Jundt, Georg Saal, Van Muyden, Brion above all, Anker, T. Schuler, who mainly made drawings, who were, so to speak, explained and supported by other artists, namely writers like Erckmann-Chatrian and Auerbach. Yes, the Italians are most definitely clever, but where is their sentiment, their human feeling? I’d rather see a grey scratch by Lançon — a few rag-pickers eating their soup while it’s snowing and raining outside5 — than the dazzling peacock’s feathers of the Italians, who seem to multiply daily, while the more sober artists are no less rare than they always were.  I mean it, Rappard. I would rather be a waiter in a hotel, for example, than the sort of watercolour manufacturer some Italians are.  I don’t say that this applies to all of them, but you get my drift as regards the direction and tenor of that school. What I say doesn’t detract from the fact that I also know many whom I find beautiful, namely the artists who have something Goya-like, such as Fortuny sometimes, and Morelli, and sometimes even Tapiró &c., Heilbuth, Duez. When I first saw some of this work 10 or 12 years ago, I was with Goupil at the time, I thought it was splendid, and even found it much more beautiful than the well-wrought things by either the Germans or, for example, the English draughtsmen or, for example, Rochussen or Mauve. I’ve long since changed my mind, because I believe those artists are rather like birds with only one note in their song, whereas I feel more sympathy for larks or nightingales that have more to say with less noise and more passion. However, I don’t have a great deal by the Germans — the beautiful ones from the time of Brion are hard to find now. I once put together a collection of woodcuts, mainly after the above artists, which I gave away to a friend in England when I left Goupil. I regret that so much now. If you want to have something really beautiful by them, put in an order at the offices of L’Illustration for L’Album des Vosges, drawings by T. Schuler, Brion, Valentin, Jundt, &c. I believe it costs 5 francs. But I fear that it’s sold out. It’s worth asking, though. Perhaps, indeed probably, the price has gone up — they won’t send it on approval, that’s why I didn’t dare ask for it myself. 
   I can give few details about English artists, in the sense that I couldn’t provide biographies of them. Having spent 3 full years in England, however, and having seen the work of many of them, I’ve learned quite a lot in broad outline about them and their work. It’s hardly possible to appreciate them fully without having spent a long time in England.  It’s a different way of feeling, conceiving, expressing, which one has to get used to first. Studying them more than repays the effort, for they are great artists, the English. Israëls, Mauve and Rochussen come closest, but in appearance a painting by Thomas Faed, for example, is very different from an Israëls, and a drawing by Pinwell, Morris or Small looks different from one by Mauve, and a Gilbert10 or Du Maurier different from Rochussen. Speaking of Rochussen, I saw a splendid drawing by him: French generals demanding information and papers from the mayor and councillors in a room in an old Dutch town hall. I thought it was just as beautiful as, say, the scene at Dr Wagner’s in Madame Thérèse by Erckmann-Chatrian. I know that you didn’t greatly appreciate Rochussen at the time, but I’m sure that when you see his important drawings you’ll like him very much indeed.  For me the English draughtsmen are what Dickens is in the sphere of literature. It’s one and the same sentiment, noble and healthy, and something one always comes back to. I would very much like it if sooner or later you had an opportunity to quietly look through my whole collection. It’s through seeing a lot together that one gets an overall view and it begins to speak for itself, and one sees clearly what a splendid entity this school of draughtsmen forms. Just as one must read Dickens or Balzac or Zola in their entirety to know them separately.  Thus, for example, I now have as many as 50 prints about Ireland — one might well overlook them seen individually, but they are striking when seen all together.  The portrait of Shakespeare by Menzel13 is unknown to me; I’d very much like to see how the one lion interpreted the other. For Menzel’s work has some resemblance to Shakespeare’s in that it LIVES, so. I have the small edition of Menzel’s Frederick the Great.
   Bring it with you if you would, if you come to The Hague again. I don’t have the prints you write about (except for the Régamey), I do not have Heilbuth, Marchetti, Jacquet. I have nothing by Whistler, but in the past I’ve seen beautiful etchings by him, figures and landscape. I was also struck by the seascapes by Wyllie from The Graphic which you write about. I know The widow’s field by Boughton; it’s very beautiful. Yes, I’m so taken by all of it that my whole life is aimed at making the things from everyday life that Dickens describes and these artists draw. Millet says – in art one must give one’s heart and soul. I’m already wrestling, I know what I want, and nonsense about the illustrative won’t divert me from my path. Contact with artists has, so to speak, completely ceased for me, without my being able to explain exactly how or why. I’m made out to be everything peculiar and bad. This means that I sometimes have a certain sense of being abandoned, but on the other hand it concentrates my attention on the things that aren’t changeable, namely the eternal beauty of nature. I often think of the old story of Robinson Crusoe, who didn’t lose heart because of his solitariness but organized things so that he created work for himself and had a very active and very stimulating life through his own searching and toiling. Anyway, lately I’ve also been painting and watercolouring, and in addition I’m drawing many figures from the model as well as scratches on the street. Lately I’ve quite often had a man from the Old Men’s Home to pose. Now it’s high time that I sent Karl Robert, Le fusain, back to you. I’ve read it through more than once and tried, and yet I make no progress with charcoal, and I prefer to work with a carpenter’s pencil. I would like to see someone make a charcoal drawing — with me it so quickly becomes flat, and the cause is something that I believe would go if I saw it being done. If you come sometime, I have a few things to ask you about it. In any case I’m glad that I’ve read it, and I entirely agree with the writer that it’s a delightful medium to work in, and I wish that I could handle it better. Perhaps I’ll discover the secret, along with other things that are still unclear to me. 
   So I’m returning it with thanks. I’m adding a few woodcuts, two German ones by Marchal, as it happens. The Lançons seem beautiful to me, and especially the Green, and The miners. If you have any duplicates, I would always welcome having one of them.  I would also welcome letters — and if you read something that strikes you let me know, for I’m out of touch with what comes out these days — I know a little more about the literature of a few years ago. When I was ill and afterwards I read Zola’s books with great admiration. I thought that Balzac stood alone, but I see that he had successors. Yet, Rappard, the age of Balzac and Dickens, the age of Gavarni and Millet, is now far behind us. For while it isn’t long since those men passed on, it’s a very long time since they began, and in the meantime there have been many changes that aren’t exactly improvements in my view. I once read in Eliot ‘though it be dead, yet let me think it lives’, so it is with the period I’m writing to you about, in my opinion. And that’s why I’m so especially fond of Rochussen, for example. You mention illustrations of fairy tales — did you know that Rochussen did splendid watercolours of German legends? I know a series called Lenore, splendid in sentiment. But Rochussen’s important drawings aren’t in circulation much, but in the portfolios of wealthy art lovers. If you go about collecting woodcuts energetically, you too will hear rhetoric about ‘the illustrative’. But what happens with woodcuts? The fine ones become rarer as time passes, harder and harder to find — and later people will search for them and not be able to find them any more. The other day I saw the whole of Doré’s work on London — I say, that’s splendidly beautiful and noble in sentiment — for example in the room in the night refuge for beggars, which you have, I believe, and otherwise can still get. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent I’m working on a watercolour of orphans29 — various things started — I have my hands full. 
   When I had finished my letter, I went out and came back with another pile of illustrations, namely old Hollandsche Illustraties, so I can add some duplicates to this batch.  First 3 very beautiful Daumiers. 1 Jacque. If you have them already, please return them when you get the chance.  The four ages of the drinker by Daumier has always seemed to me one of his most beautiful things. There is soul in it as in a Degroux. I’m very glad to be able to send you this print. The Daumiers are becoming rare. Even if you had nothing else by Daumier, the master would still be well represented in your collection. I saw splendid drawings by Frans Hals once. In this sheet I find something — in fact, everything — of Frans Hals or Rembrandt.  I’m also adding some very beautiful Morins and old Dorés — prints that are becoming rarer and rarer.  Like me, you’ve no doubt heard talk — on the subject of ‘the illustrative’ — against Doré above all, and of course against Morin.  I believe that notwithstanding this you’ve continued admiring the work of these artists all the same. But if one isn’t on one’s guard, things like that can still influence one more or less. That’s why I don’t think it superfluous, now that I’m sending you these prints, to say that for me there’s still the smell of the days of Gavarni and of Balzac and V. Hugo in these grubby woodcuts — something of the Bohème, now almost forgotten — which I respect, and that each time I see them again they encourage me to do my best and tackle things energetically. 
   Of course, I too see the difference between a drawing by Doré and one by Millet, but the one doesn’t rule out the other.  There may be a difference, but there’s also correspondence. Doré can model a torso and construct the joints better, infinitely better, than many a person who scoffs at him like a conceited know-all — witness, for example, that print of sea bathing, which for him is no more than a scratch.  I’m only saying that if someone like Millet made comments about Doré’s drawing — I doubt if he would, but suppose he did — well, he would have the right to do so. But when those who with their two hands can’t do a tenth of what Doré can do with one finger rail against his work, that’s nothing but arrogance, and they’d be well advised to be silent and to learn to draw better themselves.  It’s so silly that this lack of appreciation of drawing is so widespread these days.  You saw the drawings by Lynen in Brussels36 – how witty and amusing and clever they were. If you talked to anyone about them, they answered loftily with a certain contempt that yes, they were ‘quite nice’. Lynen himself, for example, will always remain fairly poor even though he’s probably very active and very productive and likely to become more so. Well, for my part, provided I stay active and become more and more productive, I have nothing against being fairly poor all my life, provided I have my daily bread.  Well, regards again, I hope you like the woodcuts, and that I’ll soon hear from you again. Adieu. My dear friend Rappard, Your letter has just arrived, for which I thank you. I’m glad to read once more that you take pleasure in the woodcuts. I also respect your views regarding what I’ve sent from time to time, and hope to go on sending unless you have an objection. But I’m faced by a difficult question — one that’s actually impossible for me to decide and yet I will decide it — namely, to say what they cost me. As you know, I have a particular liking for woodcuts. I usually buy them very cheaply, and yet by my standards I spend quite a lot on them and have never regretted that. Whether I paid more or less for them, though, has nothing to do with what I sent to you — since I sent you duplicates and nothing that I didn’t already have myself, as you saw in fact this summer when we sorted out the duplicates together.  I didn’t buy what I sent you especially for you — apart from a few exceptions, and for those few exceptions I only paid a little and only wish I could find more like them. But since you insist, I will charge you, say one daalder, which you can send me if you like, for example in stamps at your convenience. Then you needn’t have any misgivings about not dealing fairly with me financially. So in this way I believe this question is settled. 
   Now I’ve asked you to tell me whether you receive magazines like, for example, L’Illustration or The Graphic regularly, that’s to say this year’s issues. This is because I’m in negotiations with someone who’s selling a number of magazines that come from a subscription library. I’ve decided to take them in any case, but I already have one or two from the current year, so I’ll probably get some duplicates again. If they come from L’Illustration, for example, and if I know you already have L’Illustration, I’ll give the duplicates, when there’s an opportunity, to someone else who might enjoy them and collects them (though at the moment I don’t know of anyone for them). But if I know you don’t have them, then of course they’re yours.  I had just agreed to take this batch, even before I had received your letter, and hope to have them within a fortnight or so, perhaps even sooner — so let me know, if you would, what your position is as regards magazines in 1882.  Of course I don’t yet know whether I’ll have a lot of duplicates or not, but there are bound to be some. So be so good as to let me know about this. I’ll charge you something again if it’s worth the trouble, or we can settle it when the opportunity arises, but oblige me by telling me if I can be of service. I take an interest in your collection, and would like to see it become a very fine one. Later I may be able to send more important things. 
   I already have about 40 large and small prints by Renouard. Recently I found The exchange4 and A speech by M. Gambetta5 and prints from the orphanage6 by him. But above all I’m certain you would take great pleasure in a couple of large Lançons. Caton Woodville 8 is also very good. The more I see of him, the more I’m beginning to like him. Do you know Montbard? I believe you do at least have landscapes by him. But lately I got some sketches by him of Ireland9 and of Jernsey10 in which there was a great deal of sentiment.  I sincerely hope that you’ll take pleasure in your painting at Arti. I don’t think I’ll see the exhibition.  I’m very busy with drawings of an orphan man, as the almsmen are usually called here. Don’t you think that the expressions orphan man and orphan woman are just right? It isn’t easy to do the types one comes across on the street.  As to watercolours, I have several that I’ve started, but they haven’t yet worked out as I wished, but I’m enjoying it more than in the past. Here’s a scratch of an orphan man13 — adieu, I write in haste — so let me know soon about the woodcuts, whether you have them or not. With a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
    My dear friend Rappard, When I began collecting woodcuts I often regretted that I didn’t know who they were by if I couldn’t make head or tail of the monograms many English draughtsmen use.  Even now I don’t know everything, but do know a few, and a list of these may be of some use to you, although you may know them all.  

WS –
Small  


cG –
Charles Green (there’s also a 
T. Green)1


MEE
Miss Edwin Edwards2


F.B. 
Buckman (you have the London dustyard by him)5


F.W.L. 
Lawson6


FH
Frank Holl


HF
Henry French9


L.F. 
Fildes10


RC. 
Caldecott12


EJG 
Gregory


S.E.W. 
Waller15


AL
Lançon


EM 
Morin


JF 
Jules Ferat17


A.H.
 Hopkins


H.H.
 Herkomer


GP 
Pinwell


W.B.M. 
Murray3


F.W.
 Walker4


M.W.R. 
Ridley7


J.G. 
Gilbert8


IM (IM) 
Mahoney (Household edition Dickens.Very beautiful)11


HF
Henry Furniss13


SPH
Sidney Hall14


J.D.W.
Watson16


JB
Barnard


JT
Tenniel


CK
Charles Keene


D.M.
Du Maurier

 But often you find the names in full.  I’m sure I’ve left some out, but these are the ones that come to mind at the moment. In Harper’s Weekly there are beautiful things by Howard Pyle, Harper, Rogers, Abbey, Alexander21 among others; Caton Woodville, Overend, Nash, Dadd, Gregory, Watson, Staniland, Smythe, Hennessy, Emslie26 you no doubt know from the large drawings in The Graphic and London News. 
   I have a nice thing by Small for you. He’s someone who’s astonishingly clever.  I don’t know whether you know Scribner’s Magazine and Harper’s Monthly Review, there are always highly distinguished things in them. I have only a few of them at present since they’re quite expensive, and one hardly ever finds them second-hand. The British Workman and The Cottager and Artisan, both penny papers from the London Tract Society, sometimes have very tame things but sometimes strong, beautiful things. I’d be very glad to hear more details about what you have, when the opportunity arises, for you’re bound to have some that I don’t have, and this whole subject interests me. I would like to see the portrait of Shakespeare by Menzel sooner or later. Tell me, how are you getting on with your watercolours? I’ve again been very busy with that in the last few weeks, and also with types from the common people.  How beautiful it is outside – I sometimes yearn for a country where it would always be autumn, but then we’d have no snow and no apple blossom and no corn and stubble fields.  Please look and see whether you got a large wood engraving from me in the past, with no draughtsman’s name below it, depicting gentlemen and ladies riding in a park, I believe it’s the Empress of Austria in whose honour a hunting party or something is being given. If you don’t have it — though I believe you already got it this summer — then I have it twice, for I found another one just a few days ago.  There’s also one by Knaus, a hunter giving his dog a piece of bread.
   Talking of landscapes, I’ve always liked Birket Foster and Read a lot, even if they’re regarded as old-fashioned. Among other things by Read I have an autumnal effect and a moonlight and a snow which are very beautiful. There’s a wide range of approaches to the English landscape. Foster bears little resemblance to Edwin Edwards, but both have their raison d’être. Wyllie and others with him are more colourists, or rather seek the tone more. Especially in Scribner’s Magazine and Harper’s Monthly there are very fine things more in Wyllie’s manner — small seascapes, snow effects &c., corners of a garden or street.  Routledges Sixpenny series includes, among others, Oliver Twist illustrated by J. Mahoney, which I highly recommend to you, and Story of a feather illustrated by Du Maurier and Curtain lectures by C. Keene. But in Punch there are better ones by them. Du Maurier is very reminiscent of Menzel, especially in some of his large compositions. In Belgium at one time, Félicien Rops and Degroux, among others, drew beautiful types in a magazine called Uylenspiegel which I once had and would dearly like to have again, but alas can no longer find. There were things in it, by Degroux especially, that were as beautiful as Israëls. Well, old chap, I must get to work. I wanted to send you the list of monograms before I misplaced it again. Adieu, do write soon. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I just received your letter and it’s precisely as I intended. Now I have a rough idea about this and that, and when an opportunity arises I can try to find something to add. First of all — That beautiful wretch, I do NOT have it and is surely very beautiful, and I’d be delighted to have it if possible. Today or tomorrow I’ll send you the Holiday No. 82, which has very beautiful illustrations by Caton Woodville, Knowles3 &c.  Together with the following prints. 

Lerolle
At the riverside5


Small
In the park. 
      Spectators of cricket match.


Robinson
 The Rescue8


Robertson
Xmas on the Wave.


Renouf
A helping hand10
      Portrait of Washington. 
      Very beautiful. 


Overend
Hopes and fears.


Morris
The mowers.


Koch
Den of thieves.


Koch
Rowing regatta.


Meyerheim
Monkey academy16


Knaus
Piglets.


Frank Holl
 Home again18


Rochussen
In the dunes19


Edelfelt
At the artist’s20


– 
A merry Xmas21


Emslie
Nearing home.


Vierge
Exhibition of electricity23


Kauffmann
A school at Wissembourg24


Heywood Hardy
The village doctor.


?
Xmas hymn.


Overend
In the conservatory.


 
   You have just two or three Frank Holls that I lack, but how beautiful the one with the two people in the wagon28 is, and the other one too, and Bereaved29 as well. I know them very well.  The one I’m sending you complements Summoned for active service, I believe, since it’s Home again. I don’t have the one by Hopkins that you have, but I have others (Fancy ball32 and Charity). What greatly interests me is Buckman, In front of the shelter — if it’s from a magazine from this year, let me know which and I’ll order it. I don’t know what it is, but I know his work and find it splendid — I imagine that his treatment of this subject is extraordinarily beautiful. 

Herkomer, Hardships35 is also unknown 
to  
me.


Overend, Divine Service North Pole36
,, 
,, 



Morin, Régamey, Boulanger
38 on your last list also. If the boat race by a draughtsman you don’t know is one with, in the foreground, a part of a boat in which there are a lady in black, a lady in white and a dog, then it’s by none other than Paul Renouard. I also have for you a splendid thing by Dagnan, A bird charmer in the Tuileries Gardens, and one by Montbard, Arab beggars. These two were slightly torn, but I’ve restored and mounted them. They’re both very large, and I’m not sending them now because the parcel would be so big if I sent them flat, for they can no longer be folded.  When there’s an opportunity next time you come here, at some point, you could take them with you like last summer.  But since they’re French, you may already have them. In that case, I’ll keep them. They’re both particularly beautiful. Let me know if you don’t have them and I’ll keep them apart for you. 
   I’ve again given some thought to your scruples about accepting those I sent and, while I respect your feelings, I still believe you shouldn’t see it as a kindness by me but as something natural. For this reason. I hope you have no objection to my regarding you as a friend, and you in turn will regard me in the same way. And for my part I believe that you’ll agree with me in regarding a friendship as having to be an act above all, not just a feeling.  Consequently, it’s entirely natural that, of my own accord, I reserved a few things for you that I had in duplicate and you didn’t yet have.  You, for your part, in Brussels for example, did me a favour when I was able to make use of your studio when I didn’t yet have one, and so on. You write that you have 7 months of Montbard; if you let me know which I may be able to complete them. I see that I also have two beautiful Stanilands, which I’m adding, and one by Dollmann.  I would have to see the monogram FD46 or whatever it is to see whether I could decipher it from the way it was done. It wouldn’t surprise me if it was F. Dadd. Next, I can’t decipher the monogram under the Arrival of the coach. But I’ve found another sketch from Scotland which also has it, Salmon fishers. Caton Woodville is extraordinarily clever — I see that more and more — in addition to what you have, Nightly visit, I have more large things from Ireland by him, which form a series together with others by O’Kelly51 and Gregory52 and Dadd.
   Well, today I paid a visit to the place where the dustmen bring the rubbish &c. By Jove, how splendid that was — for Buckman, for example. Tomorrow I’ll get some interesting objects from the rubbish dump, including broken lamp-posts, to view — or to pose if you like, rusting and twisted — the dustman is going to bring them. It was something out of a fairy tale by Andersen, that collection of discarded buckets, baskets, kettles, soldiers’ mess-tins, oil-cans, wire, lamp-posts, stovepipes... I’ll no doubt dream of it tonight, but above all I’ll work there this winter. If you ever come to The Hague, I would very much welcome taking you there and to a couple of other spots which, although as humble as could be, are a paradise for an artist.  And now a drawing has been waiting for me for some time and I really must set to work on it.  So you’ll shortly receive some more prints. And if you have any duplicates, you know I would be very pleased to have them. Adieu — may your work prosper — don’t you think the weather is splendid these days? Really ‘Chill October’. How beautiful the mire is, and the withering grass. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent You would find a great deal changed in my studio since last summer — it’s much more roomy and efficient. And I hope the work is none the worse. 3. guilders for a volume of the London News is perhaps not exorbitant if it’s an interesting old one with a lot in it, but everything depends on the contents of course. 
   Do you remember the soup kitchens in Brussels? Among others, Royer opened one58 close to the town hall that winter and I saw the opening, when early in the morning soup was given free to poor folk. I remembered that lately, and this is the drawing I’m working on at the moment. I’ve had models from Geest here — a street which in my view strongly resembles rue Haute or rue Blaes in the Walloon quarter of Brussels, for example. And then what I’m looking for, of course, is certainly the right types, but much more than that the sentiment of the whole. Whether a free soup place is in Brussels, in London or in The Hague, its character is always rather like what Buckman certainly has in In front of the shelter. The figure I sketched in my last letter is, among other things, a model for that. What is Wyllie, Funeral of the late Napoleon? 62 My dear friend Rappard, I received your letter and thank you very much for it. How I sometimes long to see something of your work. As for Arti, I think this is another of the usual tricks of those gentlemen, one of those things that do not change, that were and will remain what they are. I congratulate you on their refusal.  I can’t share a similar experience with you for the simple reason that I never even consider exhibiting. That sort of thing leaves me absolutely cold. I may occasionally long for one friend or another to come to the studio to look at something, which very rarely happens, but I’ve never felt a desire (and I don’t believe I ever shall) to bring the public to my work. I’m not indifferent as regards appreciation of my work — but that too should be quiet, and a certain popularity seems to me the least desirable of things. These past few days I’ve been gathering together the studies done since about the time of your visit. I found about one hundred figures of men, women, children, not counting what I drew in my sketchbook. Although the number isn’t that important, I mention it to show that I try to put some effort into it, and yet I’m looked down upon as nothing by people who certainly work less than I do, which also leaves me fairly cold, and no one here takes the slightest notice of my work. 
   And from that you can see that, although not exactly the same has happened to me as to you, it’s a near thing. Yet, on the other hand if one wants to do figures I believe that first of all one must have what’s on a Xmas Number of Punch: Good will to all — to a high degree. One must have and retain a warm feeling of sympathy for people, for all in fact, otherwise the drawings remain cold and feeble. And I think it so necessary that one keep an eye on oneself and take care that one doesn’t become disenchanted in that respect, and that’s why I think there’s so little point in becoming involved in what I’ll just call the painters’ intrigues and doing anything other than remaining defensive towards them. And I think of the old saying, one gathers no figs of thistles, when I think that some believe they’re stimulated by spending a lot of time with artists. I believe Thomas a Kempis says somewhere: I have never been among men without feeling less a man. Similarly, I think one feels weaker, and rightly so, as an artist the more one mixes with artists. It’s only when people combine seriously to work together on something that’s too much for one person (such as Erckmann-Chatrian in their works or 
   The Graphic draughtsmen for The Graphic) that I think it an excellent thing. In most cases it comes down to: they drank a glass &c. and left things as they were.  Just as I said above that I long to see your work, so in turn I very often long for you to see mine again. Precisely because you would be of value to me, I believe, and you would see the whole that the individual drawings are gradually beginning to form, and we could talk about them and discuss whether something could be got out of them.  I’ve finally discovered, not without difficulty, how the women miners in the Borinage carry their sacks. You remember that I once did something with that – but it wasn’t yet right.  I now again have 12 studies for that same thing.  You see, the opening of the sack is tied shut and hangs downwards. The corners at the bottom are tied together and this creates that charming sort of monk’s cowl. (The hands grasp it at 1 and 2.)6 I often had a woman pose with a sack and it never came out well. I learned about it from a man who loaded coal at the Rijnspoor yard. This week I found the Punch of 1855 and that of 1862. In the first there’s a print — one of the old Swains — that is inexpressibly great in character. The then Emperor of Russia had said in his speech from the throne, I believe, alluding to the Crimean War then taking place, that Russia had two generals on whom it could rely, namely the winter months of January and February. In the month of February of that same year, however, it happened that H.M. the Emperor fell ill, 
   having caught a cold, and died.  Now in this print, probably drawn by Tenniel, one sees the old Emperor on his deathbed and General Fevrier turned a traitor stands beside that deathbed, in the form of a skeleton in a general’s uniform — both the deathbed and the phantom standing beside it are covered in snow or glazed frost. It’s marvellous, and I find the sentiment if possible even more profound and more serious than Holbein’s Dance of Death.  C.R. (Robinson) — I sent you what I consider a marvellous print by him — is rather uneven, that’s to say that, although his figures are always well drawn, it isn’t always gripping. But now I once more have a print that’s almost as beautiful as, for instance, the Afternoon in the King’s Road by Caldecott. It’s a long row of figures looking over a railing at a collapsed bridge. Do you have the Dagnan, Bird charmer in the Tuileries Gardens and the Montbard, Arab beggars, I wrote to you about? — you know that they’re at your disposal.  I found a beautiful print by Emslie, The rising of the waters, a peasant woman with 2 children on a half-flooded pasture with pollard willows.  I assure you that whenever I’m a little downhearted, my collection of woodcuts gives me fresh heart to set to work myself. In all these fellows I see an energy and a willpower and a free, healthy, lively mind that stimulate me. And their work has something lofty and dignified about it — even if they’re drawing a dung-heap. When one reads in the book on Gavarni, about his drawings, that ‘he knocked off up to six a day’, and thinks of the enormous productivity of most of the men who make those footling illustrations (you know, ‘the things that lie in the Zuid-Hollandsch Koffiehuis’), then it sometimes occurs to one that there is indeed a remarkable amount of zeal and fire in them. Having something of that fire in oneself and continuing to stoke it is better in my view than the pedantry of those artists who consider it beneath them to look at them. I find the reasoning of your friend, or rather critical visitor (how should one put that?), about the ‘DISgraceful line’ very curious and typical. When the opportunity arises, please express my great respect for his wisdom and competence: although I don’t have the honour and pleasure of knowing His Hon. myself, the type isn’t entirely unknown to me and so &c. Ask your friend with his disgraceful line whether he has criticisms of the Saying grace by Degroux15 and the Last Supper by L. da Vinci, in which composition the heads are also placed practically in a straight line. Don’t you find Andersen’s fairy tales very beautiful? — he must be another of those illustrators. Do you know Harry Furniss, A midsummer night’s dream, depicting various characters — an old man, a street urchin, a drunkard &c. — who spend the night on a bench under a chestnut tree in the park? That print is as beautiful as the most beautiful Daumier. 1 Nov. My dear friend Rappard, The article by Herkomer is extremely interesting, for which many thanks. I’ve been completely absorbed by it since its arrival, and hope that I’ll make good use of what he says.  Will his lecture be understood? — now that’s something I doubt — I fear that in general he’ll be misinterpreted, and that many will draw conclusions from his words that he didn’t intend.  I believe what he says is absolutely true, right and serious, but, I repeat, one must be to some extent familiar with the matter — more than most people are — to avoid drawing a conclusion from his lecture that would be wrong.  Many would mistakenly interpret it as meaning that Herkomer rejects and condemns the Americans and the school of Small, and in my view that isn’t the case at all. He speaks of decadence, and not without reason. He points out that the credit for many a wood engraving goes largely to the engraver and not to the draughtsman. Thus points out the enfeebling of the draughtsmen, finds this intolerable and fatal. I consider this absolutely true. Compare, for example, that print by Ridley, The miner, which you wrote to me about finding recently, with the large Types of beauty that The Graphic later published, or take another print by Ridley, the children’s ward of a hospital, which I have, soberly and austerely engraved by Swain, and then one feels the things which I’ve heard dismissed by people who pass for first-rate connoisseurs with a ‘yes, well, that’s the old-fashioned manner’ — and that brings us to what HH4 means. The old manner of engraving, that solid, honest, uncontrived drawing, is by far the best.  Herkomer says: be careful, don’t let that be lost, if art lacks that then art has meningitis or spinal consumption. Yet I don’t believe that he condemns Small himself and Chas Green, for instance, or others — I know of reproductions of drawings by Herkomer, Bavarian sketches for example, done in the same manner. 
   But Herkomer wouldn’t reject, for example, the distribution of turf tickets in Ireland by Caton Woodville7 or Xmas in olden times by Howard Pyle, even though both Caton Woodv. and H. Pyle have occasionally worked for the newer manner of illustration and gone over ‘the margin line’.  I think it a pity that C.W. did the huge military things, however clever in themselves, and I prefer his prints in the manner of the turf market. Moreover, the criticism of Harper, and the Americans, reminds me of Chas Dickens. He spoke out against them, see Chuzzlewit &c., and later, seeing that people drew the wrong conclusions from his words, such as that nothing good could come out of America, he added a preface to the later editions of Chuzzlewit in which he described his other impressions of America and his experiences on his second journey to America. Look it up in Forster’s life of Chas D., if you have it, and you’ll see what I mean, more clearly than in my words.  So when it comes to the Americans and the contemporary wood engravers, let’s not judge too hastily, and recall the old saying ‘lest ye root up also the wheat with the tares’. To be sure, his complaint against The Graphic, against publishers in general, isn’t out of place. Pleasing, Saleable13 are horrible words to me. 
   And I’ve never met a dealer who wasn’t steeped in that, and it’s a plague. Art has no greater enemies, although the managers of the big art firms have a reputation for performing a useful service by taking artists under their wing. They don’t do it right; although matters are such that, with the public coming to them, not to the artists themselves, the artists are persuaded to resort to them — yet there’s not a single artist who doesn’t have a spoken or silent complaint against them in his heart. They flatter the public in its worst and most barbaric tendencies and bad taste. Enough. What concerns you and me in H.H.’s lecture is: Draw austerely, be serious, be honest.  Now listen, this last letter of yours and the impression made on both you and me by HH’s forceful words make me wish all the more that we could see rather more of each other’s work. It struck me at the last splendid Pictura14 exhibition that although Israëls, Mauve, Maris, Neuhuys, Weissenbruch15 and many others of course remain themselves, in their followers one also sees decadence16 and can’t detect progress if one doesn’t consider them on their own but in connection with an exhibition at that time when today’s leading lights were rising men. The rising men of today are not what the rising men of the previous generation were. More effect, less substance these days. I’ve written this to you before more than once: I also see a difference in the very personalities of the rising men of today. You know it yourself and experience it yourself: you and I are regarded by them as awkward customers18 and nonentities, and above all we’re thought to be heavy going and tedious in our work and in our persons. 
   And believe me, those who saw the leading lights of today both as people and as artists 10 years ago — when they were all much poorer — they’ve earned a huge amount in those 10 years — miss those days of 10 years ago.  I take this opportunity to repeat my congratulations to you on your refusal at Arti. If you were to be a rising star in the current state of affairs, I would have less respect and sympathy for you than I do now. It’s crystal clear to me that you and I will certainly produce much finer work than we do now, and that our present work isn’t bad. For ourselves, we must remain strict and put our shoulders to the wheel, but there’s absolutely no reason to let oneself be discouraged or upset by what’s said about our work by those who think they know a better direction than we who make or try to make what strikes us in domestic life or on the streets or in the hospital &c.  If you knew what Degroux, for example, has endured by way of criticism and malice, you would be astonished. We must have no illusions, but prepare ourselves for being misunderstood, despised and vilified, and under all that, even when it gets much worse than it is now, we’ll have to hold on to courage and fervour. I believe we’ll do well to keep our attention fixed on the work and on the men of the past, namely 20, 30 years ago, if we don’t want it to be rightly said of us later: and Rappard and Vincent, too, can be counted among the decadent fellows. This is a harsh word, I absolutely mean it, and for my part I’ll go my way quietly without taking much notice of today’s school. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Please accept my cordial thanks for your postal order and no less for your letter. As for the disappointment about money that I was waiting for (about which I wrote to you), how it came about has since been cleared up. A letter with money (intended for the lithographs) has been lost, and there’s little hope of it being found, although the matter is being investigated. Rather this than what I couldn’t help fearing — that there wouldn’t be a sympathetic response, as happened this summer with the drawings. So now it’s hard that I can’t get on as well as would have been the case if the money hadn’t been lost, but it will right itself later, and I’ll try to carry on working all the same. I have little time for writing, but nevertheless want to say first that I believe your comments about drawing mistakes in that lithograph are correct, and now I noticed them too.  I would like to write at greater length about what you say, ‘one should only send something into the world when that something meets strict technical standards’. This is what the art dealers say too, and I do not believe what they say. Think about this, that will save my having to write about it, and ask yourself whether it isn’t equally permissible to send a drawing like this one, just as it is, done from the model, without later retouchings, into the world (though I admit there are drawing mistakes in it), equally permissible as my going onto the street in my working clothes if that suits me, and not being obliged to stand before the mirror before I leave the house to see if everything in my toilet is in order. Suppose you conceded that these things are of a fairly similar nature and would yourself do neither the one nor the other, the question still remains 
   whether in the midst of a campaign it isn’t much more advisable to march quickly than to make one’s toilet.  I also cannot agree with what you say about the way in which the public looks as ‘stumbling over drawing mistakes before it sees the character’. I believe, instead, that only a relatively small proportion of the public looks exactly as you describe; in general the great host to whom Herkomer says For you, the public it is really done5 don’t do this, in my view. Anyway, when I can find the time and words I’ll try again to make my meaning clear to you. While on the subject of matters in which I don’t entirely agree with you (these do not include your comments on drawing mistakes, each one of which I found to be absolutely right), I come briefly to your large decoration6 and to your menu, and say only this about them. Old chap, do something else, these are dangerous waters, one knows where one starts from but not if one will have it in one’s power to abandon it. Once one has a reputation for being able to make something for ‘festive occasions’, there won’t be a single ‘festive occasion’ that one is spared.  Look up old Mr Smits on this. He once wrote a very witty and practical piece on this subject which will make it clearer to you than I can. It’s campaign time, at least a time in which there’s a campaign to be waged. 
   I’m not talking about drawing nudes in itself, but about the large decoration.  I know the Boughton, ‘The heir’, as a painting. I saw it at the Royal Academy and later at Goupil’s. At that time I found it so beautiful that I made a drawing of it for an acquaintance in Holland to give him some idea of it. I don’t know the woodcut. I can’t get The miners by Renouard here. I’ve tried everywhere to find the latest issues of L’Illustration, but they either didn’t have them or only ones without them. On condition that I be allowed to settle up with you for them, not otherwise, I would like to ask you to take the trouble to see, if you can, which issues they are and to have them ordered for me too, if you’re planning to take them yourself, that is. If they can’t do that in Utrecht, I can have them sent here for you and for me, provided I know the issues and dates in which they occur. When ordering single issues, however, one must make haste, otherwise it often happens that the orders aren’t placed or the issue is sold out. Given that haste, it would perhaps be most practical if you placed the order directly in Utrecht. I once ordered The children in care by Renouard in the same way.
   Well, now you mustn’t take it the wrong way if I repeat in somewhat stronger terms what I mean. The more menus and decorations for festive occasions you make, even if they’re pleasing and good, the less you’ll be able to remain in agreement with your artistic conscience. The more you stay with the serious toil of institute for the blind, tile painters, knitters &c., the more you’ll feel that such toil has its raison d’être, even if one has no immediate success. The Kunstliefde society of Utrecht14 needs your serious work more than your decoration, however well it may turn out. Now I consider it as if I still had a daalder of yours in hand for woodcuts or suchlike when the occasion arises, and on that condition I won’t return the surplus from your postal order, and if I have a fearsome disappointment if the letter doesn’t turn up, it will be doubly welcome to me. Please accept my cordial thanks once more for sending so quickly, and be assured that when I say something about the decoration or don’t entirely agree with you about this or that, I speak my mind frankly precisely because I appreciate your aims and works as being important. Severe as it may sound, it is truly my opinion that you’ll have the most and the best influence for the good in, say, the Kunstliefde society if you say no to every possible honorary post and don’t spend your time making yourself useful on festive occasions, in which I see no good at all, either for the artists or for the public, and which I don’t regard as evidence that the societies that celebrate them are flourishing. Adieu, believe me, with a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Just as I was on my way to the printer1 I ran into the postman, who gave me your letter. Please accept my sincerest thanks for your proposal, which I’ll write about shortly. First I wanted to tell you that I’m now on my fourth stone, and am sending you herewith impressions of the three you don’t have;2 I’ll retouch two of them, namely the digger and the coffee drinker. The latter worked much better as a drawing. In the lithograph I used autographic ink that hasn’t transferred well, and much of the briskness that was in the drawing has been lost. There was also more life in the black, because the hatching conveyed the direction and form of the folds much better. Now the same is true of the digger, but in this print there is in general a certain strength and roughness that corresponds with the character of the figure, though I would have liked to have more variety of tone. Now I’m trying to find a way of combining the new process (transferring a drawing on paper) with the old (working directly on the stone itself). 
   You remember that drawing Worn out? In the last few days I’ve done it again no fewer than three times6 with two models, and will labour on it some more. For the present I have one that will be the subject of a fifth stone, which thus depicts an old working man who sits and ponders with his elbows on his knees and his head (a bald crown this time) in his hands. I’m telling you this and that about the lithographs to show that I’m very enthusiastic about them, and so your proposal as regards the lost money is most welcome to me.  The letter still hasn’t been found, and contained a fifty-franc note. For the time being, though, let’s wait a little longer; it’s being investigated. I told the man at the printer’s about the accident, and so far he’s been good enough not to press me about the costs of the stones. For that matter, the stones are in his hands and he runs no risk, or very little. So as to your proposal — in an emergency I’d very much like to avail myself of it, and it’s a 
   helping hand for me and I dare to go a few steps further, but it may not be necessary and the letter may turn up. It’s most certainly an encouragement to redouble my efforts, and to prove to you that I put a lot of work into it: I drew the digger in 12 different poses and am still searching for better ones. He’s a splendidly fine model, a real veteran digger. Last Sunday I had Van der Weele, painter and also drawing master at the high school here, and he saw the various drawings of orphan men and urged me to make a large composition with them, although I would consider that premature as yet, I need to have even more studies. The coffee drinker is one of them. Herewith a woodcut after Frank Holl. This brings me to what you say about a batch of magazines you’ve bought. I congratulate you on them. 70-76 is precisely the finest period, at least for the English above all. The Black and White11 was then in full bloom and in its prime. I’m sure there must be superb things among them. 
   I’ll tell you why it matters a very great deal to me to make an effort with the lithographs. If I can manage to assemble a number of good stones (one or two are bound to go wrong now and again!), this will enable me to apply for work, in England, for example, as well. It goes without saying that one has more chance of success if one can immediately show work, for instance by sending proofs of lithographs, than if one has to get by with words alone. Sending drawings isn’t an alternative, since they can easily be lost. This new process enables me to work for a lithographic printer far away without having to send stones. Just today I bought myself a new kind of ink and a new kind of crayon (copal crayon)12 for this purpose. My address these days is No. 136 Schenkweg. I would like to have your opinion about these proofs I’m sending. If it’s possible for me to rectify mistakes I’ll happily do so. Still, one has to be careful once something has been put on, and can’t control everything. I believe that the new Worn out will give you some pleasure — I hope to tackle the stone of it tomorrow. Well, my paper is full — don’t think, although I write only about professional matters, that your illness is of no concern to me. On the contrary, it gave me all the more food for thought because last summer I also caught a cold, also had quite a high fever and — and — I only hope that it isn’t the same, though. Whatever the case may be, my cordial wishes for your recovery, and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Are you continuing to make a good recovery? I do so long to have news of you. I recently bought 21 volumes of The Graphic, namely 1870-1880. What do you say about that? I’ll receive them this week, I hope. I got them very cheaply, you understand, otherwise I couldn’t have managed it. But I heard that they were for sale and got someone else interested who also appreciates them. Since your illness I’ve been working hard on Black and White drawings, and I hope to learn a thing or two from these Graphics about the strengths of black and white. I wish we could talk to each other again, because, old chap, what a lot there still is to do! What I’ve been toiling at in particular lately is heads — Heads of the people — including fishermen’s heads with sou’westers. When I’ve looked through The Graphics I’ll write to you about them at greater length. Of course I’m bound to have many duplicates. 
   Now I’ll be pleased to hear more about the batch that you bought, not just whether or not there are duplicates but also in general what interesting prints you find. I found a girl’s head by Percy Macquoid that’s wonderfully fine, a woodcut after a painting by him. Other fine prints I’ve found since include 

B. Constant
Sick fellahs beside the Nile4


Julien Dupré
Herdswoman5


Smith
 A street in South Lambeth6


Ridley
Boat race7


Robinson
ditto8


Green
Street in Whitechapel9


Régamey
Prison in New York10


Thulstrup
Workroom in Sailors hospital or home11


Abbey
Winter girl12


,,             
Peter Stuyvesandt13


Reinhart 
Fishermen14


Barnard
6 sheets15


Ed. Frère
Wood gatherers16


Buckman
donkeys on Hampstead Heath17


,,             
Gathering poppies18


Walker
Tip girls (Miners)19

 
   I had to go to some trouble to get The Graphic. For example, I had to do two portraits (two of each!) of the father and mother of the Jew I bought them from. But isn’t it a lucky find!  But it’s so odd that they’re already my property and yet I still haven’t seen them. They’re stored with another large batch of books in a saleroom, but the Jew will get them out this week. Among the books is La mascarade humaine, 100 lithographs by Gavarni. I have them but do you? And the Jew has other things as well that are probably good. Well, more soon. I hope you make a good recovery, in haste. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard. I now have The Graphics in my possession. I sat looking at them until deep into the night. I don’t know whether you know volumes 70-75, for example; perhaps you have them yourself in the batch you bought. But assuming you don’t have them, you’ll certainly be delighted by those first years if you have an opportunity to see them. I sincerely hope you have them in your batch, and otherwise I’ll write to you at length sometime, since there’s so much that’s important in them, pending your seeing them. And one way or another you must also get them for your collection.  For example, they contain a series of drawings from coal-mines by Ridley1 — done in a way that brings to mind etchings by Whistler or Seymour Haden. There are similar drawings, mainly of America, by Boyd Houghton. Up to now I thought of Boyd H. as not ALL THAT interesting. Also sketches by him from the days of the Commune, pétroleuses, a barricade &c. Herkomer is superb — today I saw several large prints for the first time, Old women’s home, old men’s home, cobbler, Skittle alley, Orphan men, Lodging house10 &c. There are also Pinwells11 and Fred Walkers12 in those first years.
   Then C. Green, Buckman, Brewtnal, Small, H. Woods, Macbeth, Gregory, various sketches of poor neighbourhoods &c. 

Frank Holl, the foundling, superb16


ditto  
I am the Resurrection and the life, „17


ditto
Railway station18


ditto
Sight seeing19


 There you have 3 prints20 that I hadn’t seen in 10 years. I come back to Boyd Houghton again — a Shaker or Mormon21 church, unbelievably real. A few fine prints by Fildes. Then large DU MAURIERS, sunny, and clear in the shade. Enough, you’ll understand that they contain riches. I long so much to have some more information about your find. If you have London News from the period 70-75, I’d dearly like to know what the main contents are. I’m sure to have duplicates as a result of my new purchase. I don’t know how I’ll do it. This Graphic series is in excellent condition, neatly bound. It’s almost a pity to undo it. But being 
   able to arrange the prints so that the work of each draughtsman is brought together is also important.  Listen, old chap, if you have the old Graphic volumes in your batch, then you know all about it. But if not, then you’ll get a strong impression if you see them at my place sooner or later. For me, looking through them brought back all the memories of London 10 years ago, when I first saw them, and they made such an impression on me that I’ve gone on thinking of them ever since, for instance the Foundling by Holl and the old wives by Herkomer. At the same time, though, I had a melancholy feeling when I saw such clear confirmation of the words of H. Herkomer that you sent to me some time ago, namely that the later Graphic issues, however fine sometimes, have in general declined a very, very long way. But the first! 
   I’m missing part of volume 70, but apart from that 70-80 complete. Altogether 21 volumes. I’ll find that first volume as well, sometime. But how are you? Do write soon, at length or in brief. And if you’re still weak sometimes, and would perhaps like to have a look at some of those early volumes at home, I could send them to you. There’s something cheering and strengthening in those lively, vigorous, manly drawings as there is in old wine. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Several days have now passed since I began looking through The Graphics.  If I were to write to you about all the beautiful things in them, and if my descriptions weren’t merely superficial, the result really would be a heavy volume. Nonetheless, I can’t resist mentioning a few prints that are absolutely matchless. For example, The foundling by Frank Holl. This shows several policemen in waterproof capes who have taken up a child left as a foundling between the beams and planks of a quay beside the Thames. Some curious onlookers watch, and through the fog one sees the grey silhouette of the city in the background. Then there’s a funeral, also by him, several people going into a churchyard, beautiful in sentiment. He calls that print: I am the Resurrection and the Life.  Then there’s another funeral by Nash, only on board a ship. One sees the corpse by the railing. The sailors stand beside it and the captain reads the liturgy. One 3rd-class waiting room by Holl is known to you from a little print of it that I sent you this summer, but in The Graphic there’s the large one, infinitely finer.  I noticed the work of C. Green some time ago but didn’t know he could make things as beautiful as, for instance, his ‘bench in the hospital’, patients who are waiting to see the doctor. Also by him a quay in Liverpool, and Land once more, passengers coming ashore from a ship. Here they come, spectators at the Derby8 (Buckman also did the same thing with the same title excellently). I didn’t know Gordon Thompson before, spectators at the Derby by him too, ‘Clapham road’10 (as it happens, close to where I used to live). This print is unbelievably good; it resembles Dürer or Quinten Massys, for example. 
   You know the work of Percy Macquoid, of Heilbuth, of Tissot, when one sees that it seems as if it’s the non plus ultra12 of elegance and soft, delicate feeling. In a sense, indeed, this is the non plus ultra. Still, compared with them, Pinwell and Fred Walker are what the nightingale is to the lark. In a sheet in The Graphic called The sisters, for example, Pinwell draws two women in black in a dark room, the simplest possible composition, in which he has put a serious sentiment that I can only compare to the full song of the nightingale on a spring night. There are two other sketches by him, Baby’s home, and a splendid sheet, among others, by Fred Walker, The old gate15 and The harbour of refuge.  The work by Herkomer in it (I’m not counting the prints I already had) includes Divine service (pews in a church), Treat to the Whitechapel poor. Lodging house St Giles, The workhouse (women), charcoal burners21 — Wirthshaus22 — The cardinals walk, Rome, Skittle alley. Carnival time, Anxious times, Arrest of a poacher. Then (apart from the large figures from it)28 the very first sketch of The last muster entitled Sunday at Chelsea. In a later volume it says of this print that when Herkomer first presented it no one on the board of The Graphic liked it except the manager, who ordered a more detailed drawing from Herkomer and immediately placed the sketch.  That’s how things can change in the world, for later there’s a sheet in The Graphic of the spectators around the final painting of The last muster.
   You know the head of a miner by Ridley. I now have a boat race spectators33 by him, and already had a hospital, both thorough, solid prints.  But something new by him is a series of 6 or 7 prints, miners, pits and pitmen, that recall etchings by Whistler or Seymour Haden, Staniland, The rush to the pit’s mouth, also in the mining region.  One print that particularly struck me is Abbey, Xmas in old Virginia engraved by Swain. This drawing was evidently done entirely with the pen — like, for instance, those by Caldecott38 and Barnard, but large figures.  Small has a superb drawing of Caxton showing specimens of his printing to the king. It recalls Leys. Of course there are many beautiful things by Small, but this and the ploughing match40 are the finest by him that I know. A queue in Paris during the siege41 by him is splendid, as are several London sketches and Irish sketches.  Green also has The girl I left behind me, especially good too, it’s a troop of returning soldiers, and the meeting of one of them with his girl, who has remained faithful to him.  Irish churchyard44 is no less beautiful. Boughton, Waning of the honeymoon. Nash. Labourers meeting46 and Life boat47 and Sunday evening at sea.  Gregory, Hospital and Paris during the siege. Buckman, Hampstead Heath. Fildes has a scene in the courtyard of a prison where policemen are holding onto a thief or murderer so that his photograph can be taken. The chap refuses to submit to this and puts up a struggle. In the other corner of the composition the photographer and onlookers.
   There are many fine ones by Boyd Houghton, most of them smaller compositions from America52 that one would think were etchings, but also large prints, Paris under the red flag, Mormon tabernacle, Cabin of emigrant ship, that don’t resemble anything else. The details are amazingly worked up, and the appearance is something like an etching by — well, by whom — by Fortuny perhaps, or Whistler. Most curious. Edwin Edwards, The foundling, Sea bathing, The meet58 &c. Two sheets — I don’t know by whom — from the Russo-Turkish War, Osman Pasha59 and an old battleground, which are remarkable for their reality. 

Stocks Sermon
time61 and Last sacrament62


Hodgson
Navvies63 and Fishing64


Gow
No surrender65


Lawson
Imprisoned spring66


Small
Swan upping, Game of polo, Boatrace. Queens ladies, R. Academy, Walking match72


Green
An artist on stone, Outsiders betting74


 Well, it’s easy to start on a list, but leaving off is a different matter; that’s difficult. There’s so much more, there’s really no end to it. For I’m speaking now almost exclusively of the large prints. Just to mention one, among the smaller is 93 by Victor Hugo illustrated by Herkomer, Green, Small — rarely has a book been illustrated in such a way — how fortunate that it’s that book, so fully worthy of it. But 1 year is missing from the collection, namely the first. However, I already had some fine sheets from it, among them Fildes, Applicants at a casual ward (Home and the homeless)76 and Fildes, The empty chair (Dickens’s studio).  Write to me soon — now that you’re better. Ever yours, Vincent To top it all, this week I got another two volumes (1876) — I took them because there are outstanding prints in them which, though I already have them, I want to have as many times as I can find — including the old wives by Herkomer, that’s a masterpiece. Have you got that??? A fine female figure by Percy Macquoid, During the reign of terror.  Small sketches too, cats — Chinese80 — mackerel fishing. At last a large print, a corner of a studio — a manikin that has fallen over, draperies which two dogs are playing with. Precious but it satisfies me less, I find it a little pedantic and too refined. There’s one more splendid illustration by Fildes (for a novel), two men in a churchyard at twilight. You’ll understand that I’m in two minds about the following question. If I cut the prints out and mount them, they look better like that and can be arranged by the draughtsmen who made them. But then I damage the text, which is useful in many ways if one wants to look up something, about exhibitions say, although the reviews of them are very superficial. One also damages, for example, the novels, like Hugo’s 93. And it costs a good deal in mounting paper. It’s quite certain, though, the large prints in particular look infinitely better mounted than with a fold through the middle. And that one has a better overall view when they’re arranged by draughtsman. But actually isn’t it ridiculous that here in an artistic city like The Hague someone like me should be the highest bidder at a public book auction? One would expect other bidders to come forward, but no. I myself didn’t think I would get them. 
   The Jew85 had talked to me about them before the auction. I said that I would like to but couldn’t think of buying something like that. Then later he told me he’d bought them at his own risk because almost no one was bidding, and if I wanted them he had them. Then it became a different matter and my brother helped me to buy them dirt cheap — one guilder a volume. Pleased as I am to have them, at the same time I feel sad that there’s so little demand for them. It’s wonderful for me to find such a treasure, but I would rather that demand was such that I couldn’t obtain them for the time being. Oh Rappard — it’s the same as with other things — much that is of great value is paid no attention nowadays, and looked down upon as ballast, rubbish or scrap paper. Don’t you find something very dull about these times? Or is it my imagination? A certain lack of passion and warmth and open-heartedness. The ‘dealers’ and their cronies may claim that ‘it’s in the nature of things that the desired change will come’87 (isn’t this explanation very satisfactory?), but for my part I don’t see that ‘in the nature of things’ so clearly. Be that as it may, it isn’t unpleasant to look through a Graphic, and while doing so one can’t help thinking very egotistically, What do I care? I don’t plan to be bored even if it is a dull age. But one isn’t always egotistic, and one sometimes bitterly regrets it when one isn’t.  My dear friend Rappard. Sincerest thanks for your letter and for the information about the woodcuts you’ve found. I’d very much like to see some of them, particularly Degroux and Lançon.  The fact that you’re recovering so well gives me no little pleasure. You know that before your illness we were corresponding fairly regularly about the lithographs, and then we had to break off that correspondence.  Since then I’ve been toiling away, not directly on stone but using lithographic crayon.  That’s an excellent material.  If I write quite frequently now, please bear with me, and for your part write often too, for you have some way to catch up — although not you yourself but the circumstances of your illness are to blame for that.  I do assure you that The Graphics I now have are amazingly interesting. More than 10 years ago I used to go every week to the display case of the printer of The Graphic and London News in London to see the weekly publications. The impressions I gained there on the spot were so strong that the drawings have remained clear and bright in my mind, despite everything that has since gone through my head. And now it sometimes seems to me as if nothing lies between those old days and now — at any rate my old enthusiasm for them is now greater rather than less than it was originally. I don’t doubt for a moment that you’ll have no complaints if you come to see them one day.  I know that you don’t look on the Black and White in the way that most of the Dutch do, and while I don’t know for sure whether you have plans to make use of this means yourself to express what you feel, I do believe that at any rate you have no prejudice about it. The one needn’t rule out the other, and in many cases Black and White especially is a means that makes it possible to put effects on paper in a relatively short time which would lose something of what people call their ‘spontaneity’ if done in another way. I wonder whether the London sketches — such as Low lodging house St Giles’s by Herkomer, Casual ward by Fildes3 — wouldn’t be a little less compelling and full of character if painted than they are in the rough Black and White.  There’s something manly about it, something rough that I find highly attractive. Something else — the boss of Black and White may be someone neither you nor I know. In reviews of exhibitions I see mention made 
   of the work of Lhermitte, a Frenchman who does scenes from the life of fishermen in Brittany. It’s said of him that ‘he is the Millet and Jules Breton in Black and White’, and his name crops up again and again. I’d like to be able to see something by him, and have recently written5 about him to my brother, who has given me very good information several times in the past (about Daumier’s painted work, for example).  As to the lithographs, the one of the chap sitting on a basket slicing his bread6 is a failure. When it was being transferred to the stone, the upper half came out all blotted and I could only partly correct it with the scraper. All the same you’ll see that there are things in them that prove that with this technique one can work vigorously and render materials, for example the basket, the trousers and muddy boots. And while I myself found this sheet very ugly in the first days, I’ve since become more reconciled to it, and if I began again I’d continue in the same, more vigorous way — with a background behind.  I read in Herkomer’s biography how in his early days (when the incident with the rough sketch of Sunday at Chelsea Hospital took place) he did his best to find some among the artists of that time who also wanted to do figures from the people. He then found Gregory, who was the first to come up with sketches from the Franco-Prussian War (Paris under the red flag ((I didn’t know at first that this print was by him)) and an emergency hospital in a theatre), and later confined himself to scenes on board ships. And Gregory and Herkomer have remained friends ever since.  Now your writing to me about getting better brings back the days last summer when I too was getting better.  There’s something that dates from that time that I must tell you about. Perhaps I wrote to you about it at the time but I don’t remember for sure. Do you recall that when you visited me last summer we met a woman and I told you that she was a model I’d found, and also told you how I discovered that she was pregnant and tried all the harder to help her because of that? 
   Soon after that I fell ill myself. She was then in the hospital in Leiden, and in hospital I got a letter from her saying how anxious she was. Before then — during the winter when she suffered terribly — I did what I could, and now I was deeply divided within myself as to what to do. Could, should I help? I was ill myself and the future was so dark. Nonetheless, I got up, against the doctor’s advice in fact, and went to see her. I saw her in the hospital in Leiden on 1 July. That night she had given birth to a boy who lay sleeping in his cradle beside her with his pert little nose above the blanket — knowing nothing, of course, about the ways of the world. At any rate, a sick painter like me struggling to get by knows things about it a child like that doesn’t know.  And what should I do? I had much to think about at that moment. She’d had a very difficult birth, the poor creature of a mother. Aren’t there moments in life when remaining inactive or saying, ‘What’s it to do with me?’ is criminal? At any rate, I said to the woman, when you’re better, move in with me. I’ll do what I can. Now, my dear friend, this woman had another child as well, a sickly, neglected lamb. It was an undertaking that was in fact considerably further beyond my strength than, say, buying The Graphic, but what else could I do? A person has a heart in his body after all, and if we didn’t dare take on things we wouldn’t be worthy of life. Well, she moved in with me — I went to live in a house that wasn’t even entirely finished and that I could get for a relatively low rent. That’s where I still live, two doors along from my old studio, it’s No. 138. And we’re still there. But now the baby from the cradle in the hospital doesn’t sleep as much as in those first few days. 
   He’s turned out to be a delightful, lively fellow, now 7 or 8 months old. I fetched his cradle from a junk shop on my shoulders, and that child — for me he was a light in the house through the whole dark winter. And the woman, although she isn’t strong and must nevertheless work hard to keep everything in order, has still become stronger because of it. So you see that while I try to penetrate deeper into Art, I also try to do that in life itself — the two go together.  That I’ve had no lack of unpleasantness with former friends who no longer looked me in the eye is something that didn’t particularly surprise me.  This was happily not the case with my best friend, namely my brother — for he and I are more friends than brothers — and he’s someone who understands such matters, and not only that — he himself has helped and still helps many an unfortunate. Nonetheless, I’ve lost some friends because of it, but I’ve gained more light and shade in my own house and more of a Home, even though sometimes when cares weigh heavily on me it’s as if I were on a ship in a storm. Anyway, though I know very well that the sea holds dangers and one can drown in it, I still love the sea deeply and despite all the perils of the future I have a certain serenity.  Now I have a great desire to speak to you again, and I’d very much like you to come to see The Graphics before long, if you can, but I write to you in advance about the changes in my household because I don’t know exactly what you think of such matters in life. If we were in the days of the ‘Bohème’, a painter’s family and studio like mine would be nothing unusual. Nowadays, though, we’re a very long way from the original Bohème, and among the painters there are considerations of decency that I don’t exactly understand, but I don’t wish to offend those who have them.  Again, were we still in the days of Bohème, I’d let everything take its course, but now I say to you, my dear friend Rappard, I live with a poor woman and two children, and there are so many who will have no dealings with me, for that and other reasons, that I’m bound to tell you this when I write, Would you like to come and go through The Graphics one of these days? 
   What I must also tell you is that when my father first heard about this, you will understand that he wasn’t best pleased, or rather didn’t know what to think, not having expected such a thing from me. Then we saw each other again nonetheless, which hadn’t happened since I came here after leaving home because of the problems there. And when he heard more of the details, he looked at it differently from at first. The disagreement I had with him when I left home didn’t last long, and we’d already settled our differences before I was with this woman. Since then even my father has paid me a visit while I was living with her.  But how many misunderstandings there are in life, and how much better everything would be if people cooperated a little more instead of arguing. Oh, old chap, I wish more of the Bohème was left in society, and especially among the painters.  Above all, you mustn’t think that it’s because of the woman that they don’t visit me; that’s one thing, but in general it’s because of the painting itself, although this summer I certainly painted studies too. In short, contact with painters here has been a severe disappointment to me. Will it get any better??? One painter here recently ended up in the madhouse — Boks, a landscape painter. It was very difficult to get help for him before he was in there, although during one illness he did get some help after all, chiefly through Mauve. Now that he’s inside, everyone speaks sympathetically of him and calls him very clever. 
   Among others, a person12 who refused him help on several occasions and rejected studies by him said lately, ‘finer than Diaz’, which I find rather an exaggeration. The chap himself told me a year ago that he got a medal in England — which he’d sold for the silver. Another painter, Breitner, with whom at first I occasionally went out drawing in the street, and who was in the hospital at just about the same time as I was, has become a teacher at the secondary school, although I know he wasn’t looking forward to it.  Is it a good time for the painters??? When I first came here to the city I went to all the studios I could get into for the sake of seeking contact and making friends. Now I’m much cooler on that point, and believe that there is a very dark side to it, precisely because the painters seem warm-hearted but all too often try to trip you up. That’s the fatal thing. We should help and trust each other, for there are hostilities enough in society anyway, and in general we’d do better if we did no harm to each other. Envy drives many to malign others, systematically. And what is the result? — instead of one large entity, a body of painters where unity is strength, everyone withdraws into his shell and works by himself. Those who are now cock of the walk create a kind of desert around them just because of their envy, and that’s very unfortunate for themselves, it seems to me. A battle with paintings or drawings is good in a sense, and at any rate fair, but we shouldn’t become personal enemies of each other or use other means for fighting. 
   Anyway, if this kind of thing is no obstacle for you, think about coming to see those Graphics, for they’re splendid, and I’d like to have a word with you about what to do with the duplicates. For there are many, and among them some of the very finest, Last muster by Herkomer, old women’s home, Low lodging house St Giles’s15 by him. Emigrants16 and BOARD SCHOOL by Frank Holl. Caxton printing by Small, Barque at sea by Nash,Old Gate by Fred Walker20 and suchlike that are the core of a woodcut collection. In short, it’s a lot. From earlier correspondence I understand that you don’t want to have them for nothing, though for my part I would gladly give you what I have in duplicate without further conditions, as long as you take pleasure in them and love them.  But I know for sure that we can arrange it so that you needn’t feel any qualms about accepting them and, since this can certainly be settled one way or another, it seems to me that perhaps we may soon meet each other again, especially if your recovery continues to progress.  And I would find it all the more desirable if you came because I’ve now put together a large number of studies from this winter which I’d like to speak to you about. I would have written to you before about one or two things that I’m telling you now, but it was still so strange for me myself, and I was rather put out by some unpleasantness with others. And I’m writing  about it now, not because I regard you as someone with narrow views on life, and not because I believe you’ll find anything incomprehensible in what I did, but because I wouldn’t think it honest of myself if, while 
   asking you: couldn’t you come and see these woodcuts?, I didn’t say that things in my household had changed considerably since your visit, and that because of that change many avoid me and would certainly never set foot inside.  The studio is much larger than my old one, but I’m always afraid that the landlord will raise the rent or find tenants who can pay more than I.  Still, as long as I can keep it, it’s a very good studio.  If you reckon that almost every one I already had from The Graphic has now become a duplicate, you’ll understand that it’s rather a lot.  And I have hopes of getting some more, especially from the very first volumes.  I’ve had both illusions and disappointments with other women once or twice, and in the past I didn’t imagine that I would end up like this. But there was something that struck me in this woman, that as a mother she was so alone and abandoned, and I didn’t hesitate, and neither then nor now do I believe I did wrong. For in my view one shouldn’t pass by where a woman is a mother and is abandoned and in need. This is a figure like those done by Holl or Fildes.  If you do come before long, don’t make your visit too short. The Graphics are so beautiful that I believe that, even while you’re still weak, provided the journey itself isn’t too tiring (as it happens, I live close by Rijnspoor station), looking at them could revive and strengthen you. Anyway, do as you think fit. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Thanks for your letter of this morning. It pleases me, and indeed I expected no less of you, that you’ve taken the things I told you kind-heartedly. When I have an opportunity to give you further details that will make the circumstances clearer, you won’t, I hope, have to alter your opinion that I acted honestly and in good faith. I am dealing with a woman who had one foot in the grave when I met her, and was shocked and disorientated in her mind and nervous system. Her only chance of surviving, according to the professor in Leiden, was to lead a well-ordered, domestic life. And even then it will take years before she’s completely normal. As to her life, I believe that, like me, you don’t condemn fallen women. Frank Holl expressed that once in a drawing that hasn’t been reproduced as far as I know — he called the drawing: her poverty but not her will consents.  My dear friend, at present I recall no less than 4 women here in town (including my own) who have fallen or been deceived and have illegitimate children, and their fate is so sad that it’s difficult to imagine. Especially because for 3 of them, at least, the chance of pulling through is almost non-existent — i.e. it’s there in theory but not in practice, in my view.  Something I should add is that I don’t consider my relationship with the woman in question to be ephemeral in nature but for ever. My words about disappointment in the past are based on something that I don’t speak of — at any rate not now. However — it’s only fair I should tell you this much — — suppose someone experiences a disappointment through wounded love so deep that he’s calmly desperate and desolate — such a condition is possible and is something like white-hot steel or iron. To feel that one is irrevocably and absolutely disappointed, and to carry the awareness of that in one like a mortal, or at least irreparable, wound, and to still go about one’s business with an impassive face. 
   Would you find it inexplicable if someone in this state met someone else who was deeply unhappy, and perhaps also irreparably unhappy, and felt a special sympathy, quite unwittingly and without himself seeking it? And if this sympathy or love or tie, arising from chance as it were, were nonetheless strong and remained so? If ‘love’ is dead, couldn’t ‘charity’ then be alive and well? Now forgive me for talking about the woodcuts. The daily work is a thing that doesn’t change, and becoming absorbed in that isn’t as dangerous as looking into the unfathomable.  I’ve found a fine Jacque, woodcutters4 (unfortunately coloured in with a child’s box of paints, but I washed most of it off). It’s a very beautiful sheet.  Two Daumiers. Meeting of those who have seen a tragedy and those who have seen a vaudeville — and art lovers. Two women (one with a child) who are sitting talking, by Oberländer, and also by him two old men who appear to be dealing with abstruse official business. Both extraordinarily real. The figures are rather smaller than most heads by Oberländer.  Beautiful Edmond Morins, especially the chestnut trees in the Champs Elysées and a boat race and Vintage.  John Lewis Brown, Hunters in the woods. The falling of the leaves by G. Doré, a very old Doré, done roughly but very good in sentiment.  Gypsies by Valério. Renouard, Beggars on New Year’s Day. These are some of the new prints. I’m glad that you took the Harper’s Xmas papers, that publication may also be too good to last. Aren’t the Winter girl13 and Dutch Patrol by Abbey14 beautiful? Judging by them, you’ll understand that the large print, Xmas in Old Virginia by him, is extraordinary. Swain engraved it in such a way that it has remained just like a pen drawing15 — it doesn’t look cut at all, nor does the Brighton promenade by Caldecott16 — which I believe you have. 
   I know Harper’s Magazine from a few old issues I have. I too am thinking of taking this year’s, but towards the end of the year there may be a chance of finding it second-hand.  By the way, I’m in correspondence about the way in which the sheets like those in the Xmas papers are done. I have samples of the paper and some information regarding the strengths of black and white, and how they can be obtained. That paper is most curious: it sometimes has a kind of basic colour and grain that’s like a grey mist — it lends itself perfectly to snow effects, for example. There’s also paper with hatchings. I still have a beautiful print by Dagnan, Jardin des Tuileries, and one by Montbard, Arab beggars, for you, and certainly smaller ones too, over and above the duplicates from The Graphic. Before your illness you wrote that you had two ladies in a boat by Heilbuth20 in duplicate. I lack that one (although I have other large Heilbuths) and am just reminding you.  I don’t remember whether I’ve already written to you about  


Old Christmas from 
Washington 
Irvings 
Sketchbook 
ill. by  
Caldecott.


Bracebridge Hall
,, 
,,
,,
,,
,,.


 Two books at sixpence apiece, published by Macmillan & Co. London. In each a hundred small drawings, which are by Caldecott21 but are sometimes so beautiful that one thinks of Menzel.  When there’s an opportunity, I’d like to know what the subject is of Degroux, Winter in Brussels.  Have I already written to you about Lhermitte? He seems to be the boss of Black and White drawings; they say of him ‘he is the Millet and Jules Breton in Black and White’. One review talked about women saying their prayers on the cliffs of Brittany, a paupers’ pew and an old market and so on.
   Although as a result of taking in the woman and her two children I experienced some unpleasantness, rather nasty in fact, I still found a certain calm and serenity through this meeting. And worked hard this winter. Had some very real models.  At the moment I’m not working very hard, for after slogging away almost without pause or rest for several months, mainly on heads, I felt a kind of weakness or fatigue that I couldn’t overcome. In my eyes, too, so that even looking was an effort. In the past few days I’ve done a lot of walking out of doors and not much drawing, and my eyes are back to normal now.  I believe I have one hundred and fifty studies you haven’t yet seen.  The changes in the house have made me work not less but more, I’ve even worked in a kind of fury, but a calm fury, if you’ll permit me to put it like that. Also went back to literature again, which I had given up for a while.  I believe you’d be very taken with the little child — those who abandon a woman when she’s pregnant don’t know what they’re doing. A child brings a ‘ray from on high’, so to speak, into a house. And as for the woman herself, do you remember what Gavarni said? ‘There is an insupportable, silly and ill-natured creature — that is the young girl; there is a sublime and devoted creature — that is that girl when she has become a mother.’25 This isn’t intended, I believe, to brand all young women or girls absolutely (that goes without saying), but to show forcefully how something vain in a woman before she’s a mother is replaced by something sublime later, when she toils for her children. I saw a figure by Paterson in The Graphic, an illustration for 93 by Hugo, called Dolorosa. And that struck me because of the resemblance to the woman as I found her. There was a scene in the same book where someone, despite being a hard, proud man, was suddenly touched by two children who were in danger. And though selfish by nature, he forgot the danger to himself and saved the children. One never finds oneself exactly in a book, only some things from nature in general that one finds vague and ill-defined in one’s own heart. I find much that is true in The haunted man by Dickens. Do you know it? Neither in 93 nor in The haunted man do I find myself exactly — everything is quite different, sometimes turned round, but much of what I felt is awakened when I read it. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I’ve just received the roll of woodcuts. Many thanks for them. They’re all beautiful. Heilbuth1 finer than any of the sheets by him I already have. I remember your remarking to me once on the particularly fine execution of it. Why does this come to mind? — precisely because the execution struck me — as being done in exactly the way that my brother has already written to me about. If you come here sometime I’ll show you on what that’s done, and I think this will rather surprise you, as it does me. And don’t doubt for a moment that you’ll come to understand fully how those effects of grey, white and black are obtained.  The print I’m most pleased with at present is The light of other days by Lucas. Isn’t it just like one of Andersen’s fairy tales? Oh, I find it so beautiful and real. As it happens, I have New Year’s Eve4 by I don’t know whom, but a German, also a night watchman before a tower hatch in the snow, which is a pendant as it were. And how vigorously engraved it is.  There’s a lot of life in Marchetti, At the weigh-in, resembles Small especially.  I have two curious prints by Gussow. This one with the two old people6 is good.  That beautiful wretch7 is enticing. What a contrast in woodcut between the illustrations in that and The light of other days, for example. I already knew several of the figures, because they were adopted by Univers Illustré, I believe. Most were entirely new to me, though, and I find some of them splendid, such as the small figure in white against a tonal brown background of dune or heath, and the walk in the snow too, the old lady in black by the fire. It’s what I would call cosy to a high degree.  They may only be impressions, but they’re fresh. It’s a splendid package, again many sincere thanks. 
   Do you have Snowballing, a large sheet from London News by E. Frère, a school playground with boys? I’ve just got it in duplicate.  At the same time I found a particularly fine large print by Vautier, An arrest.  I long so much for you to come — not just out of selfishness because I long to see you, but also because I’m so firmly convinced that being introduced to the first years of The Graphic, above all, will make an impression on you that will give you ‘complete certainty’ as to the importance of woodcuts. Not that I still believe that you aren’t now very deeply attached to them — on the contrary, I don’t doubt it in the slightest.  But still, there are several prints which you probably don’t know yet and which will make it all even richer and more solid.  It seems to me that if one owns a print and sees it constantly, one comes to find it even more beautiful. I think you know the three Herkomers I’m sending you herewith. But I really want you to have them too.  And — my dear friend — I’ve talked to you a great deal about Pinwell and Walker. Now here for once is a real Walker, first-class quality. Did I overdo my praise of it?
   Now, without more ado you must accept these and the others that I have in duplicate because of The Graphic. In my view prints like these together form a kind of Bible for an artist, in which he reads now and again to get into a mood. It’s good not only to know them but to have them in the studio once and for all, it seems to me.  I don’t doubt for a moment that when you receive these (unless you already have them) you’ll feel that it’s good to have them, and that one immediately decides one never wants to let go of them.  If you feel greater or lesser pangs of conscience about accepting these and other prints, just consider — do you regret having taken those first ones last year? I think not, for, whether it was because of that or something else, this year your collection has been something that you thought about more than in the past. That’s only to be expected: it’s precisely through having those prints oneself that one thinks about them more and more and the impressions become clear and strong. And so these will have a similar effect, I believe. They’ll increasingly become friends of yours.  Now, for my part I haven’t regretted giving them to you, for you appreciate them and you view them as they should be viewed. There are few who are in sympathy with them, and the fact is that I’ve come to value your friendship precisely because you have an eye and a heart for them, and would find it difficult to do without it. 
   I used to think that most painters felt and thought about art in the same way as you and I, but this isn’t so in this respect. Well, enough of this. Trust me in this and accept them without more ado. you’ll have more of them when you’ve completely recovered and you come here sometime.  I must say something else to you as regards Irish Emigrants by Holl. The woman I wrote to you about is, as a type, rather like the central figure in that print, namely the mother with her child on her arm. Taking a broad view, without considering details.  I can give you no better description of her. Now, old chap, get well quickly, write soon, have no scruples about this package, thank you again for yours, a firm handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Yesterday I collected together a few things I’ve acquired in duplicate since I last sent duplicates to you. This is entirely separate, however, from The Graphic, which I’m leaving in the condition I got it in for the time being — though when I have time and a plan I’m seriously considering mounting the prints. I think you’ll find the Régamey Convicts outdoor work1 very fine.  I’m sorry I haven’t any duplicates of the other convicts prints by him, which show a walk and a midday meal. Done with astonishing austerity, with almost more character than this print.  The Hopkins, Boat race and weather3 recalls Percy Macquoid, say, I think.  What character it has, and what a distinctive daylight tone. Do you know by whom The first warm day might be? Isn’t it beautiful? The small Jules Ferats, Prisons of the past and today, go well with the small Renouards of Mazas. If there are some among them that you already have, return them at your convenience, there’s no hurry, of course. Now I also have a large Heilbuth in duplicate, By the water’s edge, the figure of a lady, she’s sitting on part of a tree-trunk and you’ll be able to verify whether you already have this sheet from this detail and the title. I didn’t send it because I was almost certain you had it — but I’m not sure and it’s very beautiful, so have a look to check. That print by Dadd goes well with the Green, signboard painter.
   Poor Irish scholar is again by that MF who made the Merthyr Tydvil Pawn Office. Small as that print may be, it’s strikingly beautiful, isn’t it?  I don’t know by whom the two small Irish sketches, Arch’s cottage and Labourer’s home, are, but I think that the latter in particular is outstanding. Well, this is just a mixed bunch. Good Friday is by Barnes, I believe. I’ve just remembered that for some time I’ve been keeping a fine portrait of Corot for you; I’ll put it in with the others right away. Whenever I have time I browse through The Graphics — there are treasures in them! I’m writing in haste, and collected these together while clearing up the studio. I hope there’ll be something you like. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Tuesday afternoon Dear Mr de Zwart, I am sorry that you came to see me yesterday and did not find me at home — I did not know you intended to come that day.  Now I hear from Giesenberg2 that in all likelihood you will be coming to Schenkweg again tomorrow (Wednesday). I shall certainly stay at home tomorrow, because I should like to speak to you about one thing and another to do with some minor alterations.  Yours respectfully. Your servant Vincent van Gogh3     My dear friend Rappard, About a week ago I sent you a small roll of woodcuts with a letter enclosed. Did you receive them?  Since then I’ve taken The Graphic apart. There’s one overriding reason that made it desirable to do so.  Going through 21 volumes is a chore that takes too much time. They naturally contain a great deal to which I’m completely indifferent and which is thus dead weight.  Another point is that I think it desirable to have the work of, say, Small or Herkomer, of Green or Frank Holl, together instead of dispersed between things that absolutely do not go with them. Now it’s possible to view the whole in a few hours, if one takes out only the best and most distinctive sheets. And one doesn’t have to spend a long time searching for a particular sheet that one needs.  So I did it. And I’ve already sorted what I took out — but haven’t yet mounted them. 
   The bindings of the 21 volumes can now serve as portfolios, and I’ll complete the collection of The Graphic woodcuts with all the others I have.  It’s a lot of work but still a cheerful task — for I count myself lucky to have something so pleasing in the studio for good. Naturally, there are quite a few duplicates available.  I have another job on my hands, namely, that I’ve started a sort of battle with my landlord1 to obtain various privileges. Namely changes to the studio. So that I get better light and a big, sturdy cupboard for drawings, portfolios, prints and books. This battle is all the more difficult because I don’t pay the full rent but already have the house relatively cheaply. And so, of course, it wasn’t easy to get anything done. Nonetheless, I’ve just come to an agreement with him whereby I’ve got at least some of the privileges. 
   He’s having some trouble letting his houses, and what I asked for was wood that he didn’t need soon anyway.  Well, it’s a step forwards, because the studio will be much better. Anyway, I’m glad I tackled him. I got the idea of starting the battle with him while reading Fritz Reuter’s ‘Uit mijn gevangenis’. You may well know the book, which describes delightfully how Fritz R. and others serving fortress sentences got the ‘field officer’ to do things for them. Speaking of Fritz Reuter, don’t you think his character Bräsig in Gedroogde kruiden is superb? — and his Hawermann. I think it’s as fine as Knaus and Vautier. Lately I’ve been working on large figures (busts, or rather to the knees) with which I intend to decorate the wall beside the stairs. 6 pieces on cardboard in black and white.  If you come sometime, it will be easier to look through the woodcuts. You’ll be interested, for example, in the Boyd Houghtons, Mormons, Indians, a few London sketches7 and several prints of Paris during the Commune, a total of 30 perhaps. And a few large compositions, Emigrants9 and Mormon worship. I now have 7 large prints by Du Maurier — first of all Souvenir of Dieppe, the finest of them all — you know that one already — the others are Musical rehearsal12 — Rival grandpas13 and Before dinner14 — from The Graphic portfolio — Battledore and shuttlecock, Sketch in the monkeyhouse16 and Cricket match.
   There is, though, a large ladies’ boarding school that I do not have, probably among the very first nos. of The Graphic.  I’ve never seen any other large compositions by him, however. That series is by Du Maurier and Miss Edw. Edwards (MEE), and the latter has some prints in it that are almost as fine as the ones by Du Maurier himself.  Do you know JD Linton (monogram JDL)? A band of women (during the Commune) by him is superb. Jewish synagogue, Tower22 &c. are also most striking. But you’ll greatly enjoy the C. Greens — large prints, among them a hospital, benches full of patients, which is excellent. I’m just writing because in the roll I sent there was a letter (in which I thanked you for what you sent &c.), which isn’t actually allowed, and this could be the reason why it wasn’t delivered.  Are you making progress with your recovery? And are you already back at work? Adieu, write soon.  I received your roll but no letter.  Ever yours, Vincent Schenkweg, Friday morning Dear Mr de Zwart, Today I paid Giesenberg1 for the week ending last Monday, 19 Feb., and for that ending Monday, 26 Feb. — 6. guilders in other words. I hope you see from this that I, for my part, also wish to cooperate. This payment thus covers the period up to 1 March — except for approx. 10 guilders, which you know all about and which remain outstanding until I have the money. So 10 March is the date on which Giesenb. can first collect the 4. guilders, or let’s say 4., and then on the 1st, 10th and 20th of each month. The alterations to the studio are most satisfactory as far as I can judge initially, and now the studio will be practical for the first time.  To tell you the truth, the studio was a fairly big disappointment these first few months, and was not what I had hoped, because there was too much light and reflection — something incidentally that you, as someone who makes drawings himself, will understand is not imagination on my part but a genuine drawback and obstacle.  This was a rather severe disappointment, and I haven’t worked with the enjoyment I could have had. 
   Anyway, I am now beginning, however, to feel the same pleasure and hope about it as last summer when I saw it for the first time, but it has begun with a disappointment.  Now, as regards the little room in the attic — I should like to have that reasonably sound and solid so that it is agreeable to occupy, and practical, with a box bed. So that the person who will be there can sit down if she wants to be alone, and will really get some benefit from it.  I understand, however, that I absolutely cannot ask such a thing of you at this point.  But still I would like to have it, and you yourself may well take the view that it is better to make something sound and permanent of it from the start.  Well, that is what I wanted to propose to you.  Paying the rent on time is already so difficult for me that I don’t dare promise you that I’ll pay extra for it.  But if need be I am willing to try to borrow some money for it, and if I manage to do this 
   I would want to pay you all the arrears in March, say. But this would be the utmost I could do at the moment.  And since I am not absolutely sure whether I can get it, you need not make a start on it until I have paid you. But for my part I would object to taking the step of borrowing money if it were not for the little room.  And should like to hear from you sometime whether it would be acceptable to you if we agreed that you will make the room sound and solid with a box bed as soon as I have paid you all the arrears. I am not in great haste about this, and so should like to ask you if you could see, at your convenience, whether there might be wood available and then let me know what you think.  In expectation of that — yours respectfully. Your servant Vincent van Gogh2    My dear friend Rappard, Thank you for your letter, which I had already been looking forward to. I’m not surprised, by the way, that you thought the sheets sent recently1 beautiful. I for one can hardly imagine anything more beautiful in woodcut than Harbour of refuge2 or Low lodging house.  Come soon and collect the remainder. I know of no better way of determining which duplicates you have than for you to sort through them yourself, for listing the titles would be too laborious. But if you think you won’t be able to visit for the time being, and if you long to have them, I can make up a package with everything that I have in duplicate. I could send it to you and then you could keep what you don’t yet have and return the rest.  Be assured that if you would prefer that I’ll be only too pleased to do it.  I have a request for you, namely to give me the worst impression of the old women’s house by Herkomer (from the French illustrated magazine) that you already have. I have it myself, of course, but I have someone here for whom I want to make the beginnings of a collection, namely for the painter Van der Weele, the drawing teacher at the high school here. He’s made some 10 etchings himself — a little thin but still good — and at his studio I saw an excellent sketch of a ploughed field by evening6 and an outstanding small panel of hay-stacking which he has also etched. He’s someone who’ll become enthusiastic, I hope, and it may encourage him to press ahead vigorously with work in Black and White, whether in lithograph or etching or drawings.  With him in mind, I’d also like to ask you for other prints that you may have available in duplicate — I believe you still have the Gypsies by Régamey, for example. I hope you’ll meet him when there’s an opportunity. He’s a fine chap. 
   To make sure that I don’t give him prints that you don’t yet have, here’s a list of what I have ready for him: 

Herkomer
At death’s door9


Menzel
Siesta10


      – 
Hunting field11


Renouard
The orphanage12


      ,, 
Regattas13


Frère
Snowballing14


Heilbuth
By the water’s edge15

 This week I bought some parts of vol. of Illustr., Monde Ill. and Univers Ill. I now have all six prints of The orphanage by Renouard in duplicate, and I list them here to make sure that you’re not missing any. 

1
Abandonment 


2
The crèche  


3
The change .


4
 Number 68.


5
 Going to the dining room 
    and Time for porridge


6 
Sheet with croquis of a rachitic child, 
    a scrofulous child &c


 If you don’t have any of these, I can send them to you. I hope to get a copy of Fildes, C. Dickens’ Empty chair for you. I’ve been promised it. Herewith a sample of that paper for lithography. I’ve scribbled on it a little with lithographic crayon and autographic ink and scraper in an attempt to combine the different modes on one sample, not of course to suggest that you should normally overwork a drawing like this. I scribbled this on a slip I had left and have no time to make a better one.  What can you see from this? First what kind of paper it is, second on which side you should draw, third that you can use all kinds of things on it — but the autographic ink isn’t to be trusted, sometimes it works very well in transferring, sometimes it runs (for the drawing is wetted when it’s laid face down on the grained stone and then pulled through the press until it’s transferred). So the ink can sometimes start to run again, and in that case you get a black cake instead of your drawing. 
   Still, it can be done — and, above all, you can retouch in ink on the stone itself.  At the same time I’m sending you 2 samples of coarse paper that I believe is very good for mounting the woodcuts.  It sets them off well precisely because it’s so rough, and it has a most beautiful colour.  The changes to my studio have worked out very well. The light is now wonderful, am very happy with it.  I’ve finished mounting and cutting out The Graphic woodcuts. They look much better now that they’re arranged in order.  Do you know Dalziel as a draughtsman? I have a public house by him20 — something like the one by Green21 — very beautiful. Well, my dear friend, perhaps I’ll write more soon. Wanted to send you the sample of lithographic paper without delay, but am busy. So regards, write again soon, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Have a splendid Giacomelli, a large print of a flight of crows. I know your fine Bodmer, Eagle owls, well, but haven’t got them. There must be a great deal that’s beautiful in those old volumes of illustrated magazines.b My dear friend Rappard Thanks for your letter of 27 February, which I’m answering today. First of all your questions about lithography. You’ll have seen that it’s the same paper for ink or crayon. I get this paper from Jos. Smulders & Co., paper dealers, Spuistraat of this city; their warehouse is in Laan, and there they have a large stock of stones in various sizes. They called it ‘Korn paper’, and had ordered it for one of the ministries, where various maps were drawn on it for lithographing. There were a few sheets over and I took all of it. He then said that he would order a few more sheets. I don’t know whether he did so, but in any case Smulders knows all about it and can order it within a few days by post. It’s rather expensive, 1. guilders a sheet. Lithographic crayon — as well as a type made specially for the paper, more expensive than the ordinary type and in my view greatly inferior to the sort not specially made for it — as well as autographic ink, liquid and in pieces, can also be obtained from Smulders and other places, for these ingredients can surely be found at all lithographers. The scraper I used is this shape  Needless to say, you can in fact use various things as a scraper. The shape doesn’t matter much – I did it with my pocket-knife as well. How much do I pay for my experiments?? He’s promised to quote a fixed price, together with prices for printing and stones. The prices I paid provisionally don’t count since we had come to an arrangement, because the printer himself didn’t know at that point — and there were failures &c. However, I’m to get a quotation from Smulders which will be rather interesting but which he had to take time to work out. 
   He was to quote me prices, that is, for stones of different sizes bought 12 at a time, and for printing one series of 1 and one series of 2 dozen drawings. And the price for paper. When I last spoke to him he was terribly busy and said, remind me at the end of March, then we’ll check on everything together in the warehouse. So for the present I know next to nothing about the actual prices. The running of the ink when printing doesn’t depend directly on the thickness of the lines, at least I’ve seen enormously thick lines transferred perfectly. As to your friend who draws with a fine pen, that’s up to him, but I think it’s absolutely wrong, because I fear that in this way he’s trying to get something out of the process that isn’t in its nature. If one wants to work with a fine point and still be forceful, I know of only one way, namely etching. If one wants to work with a pen in autographic ink, my feeling is that one should certainly not use a pen finer than an ordinary writing pen. Very fine pens, like very elegant people, are sometimes amazingly impractical, and in my view often lack the suppleness or elasticity that most ordinary pens have to some degree. Last year I bought at least 6 expensive, special penholders and various pens — it was all rubbish. But at first sight they looked very practical. Anyway, I don’t know either, some may be good, and a good result may come from working with autographic ink and fine pens — so be it — I’ll be pleased if it works out well, but I should think one would get more satisfaction from the fuller, bolder stroke of an ordinary quill pen, for example.
   Now another thing — do you know natural chalk? Last year I was given a few large pieces by my brother, this size, no less.  I scrawl some lines here at random to show you the range of black., Don’t you think it’s beautifully warm? I immediately wrote to my brother for more of the same. Shall I send you a piece when I get it? But if you already know of it and can get it at your place, then you send me some. For I intend to use it continually in combination with lithographic crayon. It’s just as if there were soul and life in the stuff, and as if it understands what one intends and itself cooperates. I’d like to call it Gypsy chalk. Because the pieces are very big, there’s no need to use a holder. It has the colour of a ploughed field on a summer evening! I’ll get half a barrel if that’s the measure it’s sold by, which I doubt, however. Album des Vosges is already a fairly old publication, but it certainly does exist. And it’s beautiful. Your list of woodcuts has some fine things, especially the Lançons. I have Smugglers, but I lack Aid Committee, for example. But I have Soup distribution in duplicate – perhaps the same one but perhaps not, and have an inn with Rag-pickers12 in duplicate. So you can have them. I know sketches by Renouard of cats, pigs, rabbits13 but I haven’t got them. I have Speech by Gambetta14 and moreover Beggars on New Year’s Day too.
   Have found 2 beautiful >Régameys, a Foundling hospital in Japan16 by F. Régamey, and soldiers in white cloaks keeping black horses in check by Guillaume Régamey, after a painted sketch, very fine. Read a short biography of both brothers. Guillaume is dead, was only 38 years old. Began by exhibiting some military paintings that resembled Bellangé. Afterwards he became rather reclusive, seems to have had an illness that made life difficult for him. Yet worked throughout it all — for years — when he was dead — a host of superb studies were found — which were then exhibited — while during his lifetime almost no one knew about them. Isn’t that beautiful? F. Régamey travels a great deal and, as you know, is very strong in the Japanese. What you say about the French woodcuts in general is what I also feel: the English have found more of the soul of woodcuts, the original character that’s as singular as the character of etchings, such as Buckman, A London dustyard, and Harbour of refuge by Walker. Still, Boetzel and Lavieille22 know that too, though, but Swain is the master. I think, though, that the Lançons engraved by Moller are highly original in character. There is soul in the Feyen-Perrins24 by Boetzel, for example, and the Millets25 by Lavieille. But otherwise, well, often they lapse into the industrial, the unfeeling. You ask after De Bock. I haven’t visited him for a long time, not since before I became ill. I noticed that whenever I looked him up or saw him he said ‘Oh, I’ll come round and see you’ in such a manner that I concluded I should take it as meaning: but don’t come to see me until I’ve been to see you, which isn’t going to happen. At any rate I haven’t gone back there, precisely because I don’t want to intrude. I know that De Bock is working on a very large painting at present. This winter I saw a few smaller ones that I thought very beautiful. I didn’t meet De Bock himself at his studio but on the street, twice recently, in fur coat, kid gloves &c. In short, like someone in extremely flourishing circumstances. And I hear on all sides that he is indeed what one might call flourishing. I often find his work very beautiful, but it doesn’t remind me all that much of Ruisdael, for example, and on reflection that may not be your lasting impression either. Actually, I’d very much like to see his studio again, just because I’d so like to be convinced that it’s as beautiful as I’d like it to be, and now I can’t help having my doubts about him all the time. Last year my impression of him was really not very favourable — he was always talking about Millet — fine, 
   and about the greatness, broadness, of Millet — for example, out of doors too; I once spoke to him about this in the Scheveningse Bosjes. I said then – But De Bock, if Millet were here now, would he look at those clouds and that grass and those twenty-seven tree-trunks and forget only that little chap in his bombazine suit who’s sitting eating, his spade at his side? Or would that small part of the panorama where the little man sits be the point on which he fixed his attention? I don’t think I love Millet less than you, I said. The fact that you admire Millet gives me great pleasure, but forgive me if I don’t believe that Millet looked in the way you’re forever suggesting to me. Millet is above all, and more than anyone else, the painter of mankind. To be sure he painted landscapes, and it’s no doubt true that they’re beautiful, but it’s hard for me to understand how you can really mean what you say when you see in Millet above all the kind of thing you suggest to me. In short, Rappard, in friend De Bock I find more of Bilders, for example, than of Millet or Ruisdael. Still, I may be mistaken or see more in him later, nothing would please me more. I certainly like Bilders too, and there isn’t a painting by De Bock that I don’t see with some pleasure. They always have something fresh and friendly about them. But there’s a certain kind of art, perhaps less flowery, more thorny, in which I find more for my heart. I know Ruisdael himself had his metamorphoses, and his finest works may not be the waterfalls and grand views of woods but ‘The breakwater with russet waters’ and The bush in the Louvre. The mills at Van der Hoop. The bleaching grounds at Overveen in the Mauritshuis here. And more of the more ordinary things he went in for later on, probably because of the influence of Rembrandt and Vermeer of Delft. I’d like something like that to happen to De Bock. But will that be the case? I’d pity him if he didn’t land more in the thorns than in the flowers, that’s all.
   And although there has been an unintended coolness for some time now, nothing more serious than a few discussions about Millet and similar subjects has passed between us. And I’ve nothing against him — only so far I don’t exactly see the likes of Millet or Ruisdael in him. For the time being I find it like Bilders, not Gerard Bilders32 but the elder. And I certainly don’t dismiss that, and wouldn’t write so much about him if I didn’t care for him. I’m still very happy with the changes to the studio, especially because the experiments I did with various models showed me that a great deal has been gained. In the past a figure in the studio had no cast shadow, since the strong reflection threw light back on it. In this way all effects were neutralized. Now that drawback has been overcome. Don’t think for a moment that I’m abandoning lithographs, but I’ve had so many expenses and have so many things I need to buy that I can’t tackle any new stones. Nothing will be lost by waiting a little. But I’m longing to work more with natural chalk. Do you know what I sometimes long for so much? — it’s to see your studio. And not just that, but also the area where you normally stroll and potter about in search of subjects. I’m sure there are beautiful courtyards and alleys in Utrecht too.
   The Hague is beautiful — and there’s enormous diversity. I hope to work hard this year. There are often financial difficulties, too, that hold me back — you will understand that — but I’ll concentrate more and more on Black and White, precisely because I want to and must work a lot. With watercolour and painting, too, I have to keep stopping because of the costs, and with a piece of chalk or a pencil one has only the costs of the model and some paper. I would rather spend what I have on models than on painting materials, I do assure you. I’ve never complained about money spent on models. Do you have the portrait of Carlyle — that beautiful one in The Graphic? At the moment I’m reading his ‘Sartor resartus’ — the philosophy of old clothes — under ‘old clothes’ he includes all manner of forms, and in the case of religion all dogmas. It’s beautiful — and honest — and humane. There’s been a lot of grumbling about this book, as with his other books. Many regard Carlyle as a monster. One nice comment on ‘the philosophy of old clothes’ is the following. Carlyle not only strips mankind naked but skins it too. Something like that. Well, that isn’t true, but it’s true that he’s honest enough not to call the shirt the skin — and far from finding a desire to belittle man in his work, I for one see that he puts man in a high position in the universe. At the same time, more than bitter criticism, I see love of mankind in him, a great deal of love. He — Carlyle — learned much from Goethe, but even more I believe from a certain man who wrote no books but whose words have survived nonetheless, although he didn’t write them down himself, i.e. Jesus. Before Carlyle he included many forms of all kinds under ‘old clothes’.
   This week I bought a new 6-penny edition of Christmas carol and Haunted man by Dickens (London Chapman and Hall) with about 7 illustrations by Barnard, for example, a junk shop among others. I find all of Dickens beautiful, but those two tales — I’ve re-read them almost every year since I was a boy, and they always seem new to me. Barnard has understood Dickens well. Lately I again saw photographs after Black and White drawings by B., a series of characters from Dickens. I saw Mrs Gamp, Little Dorrit, Sikes, Sydney Carton, and several others. They’re a few figures worked up to a very high standard, very important, treated like cartoons. In my view there’s no other writer who’s as much a painter and draughtsman as Dickens. He’s one of those whose characters are resurrections. On a children’s print I found a small woodcut by Barnard engraved by Swain. A policeman in black drags along a woman in white who struggles against him. A band of street urchins follow behind. It’s almost impossible to express so much of the true character of a poor neighbourhood with fewer means. I’ll get another copy of that print for you — it’s only a small scratch. Unfortunately, I can’t get you the print Empty chair by Fildes, which I was promised along with some others. The man now remembers ‘clearing them up’ a few years ago. Write again soon — may the work prosper in every respect. Oh — I have a near complete French edition of Dickens translated under the supervision of Dickens himself. I believe you once told me that you couldn’t enjoy all of Dickens’s English works because sometimes the English was complicated, for instance the miners’ dialect in Hard times. If ever you would like to read some of it, it’s at your disposal, and I’m willing to exchange the whole collection of Dickens in French for something else, if you like. I’m gradually coming round to the idea of taking the English Household Edition. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent In The Graphic, 10 Feb. 1883 there’s a little figure by Frank Holl, a child in an attic room, very real. I bought the issue for it. The illustrations by John Leech47 and Cruikshank have character too, but the Barnards are more worked up. Leech, though, is strong with street urchins. 
    Schenkweg 14 March. Dear Mr de Zwart, Last Monday1 I paid Giesenberg2 not only the 4. guilders due that day but also a further 10 guilders. In accordance with the matter dealt with in my letter of last month with regard to the attic room. May I now count on your kind consideration in respect of fitting it up efficiently? Otherwise leaving it to you, naturally, to decide how you want to do it. I respectfully remain, Your servant Vincent van Gogh.    My dear friend Rappard, Last Sunday I was at Van der Weele’s. Saw a painting by him there that I think is by far the most beautiful of his that I know. It was of several sand-carts by the side of a channel or canal. In the mist. It perhaps bore some resemblance to the work of Mauve, both in subject and in the approach and execution. Inasmuch as it was done in the same spirit but with enough personality to be absolutely original and singular. The dimensions were rather large. I write this to point out that Van der W. is one of the rising men, in my view. And I wish you knew him personally; now the woodcuts may provide an opportunity for getting acquainted, it seems to me. Either through you bringing him those prints sooner or later (I mean the Herkomer, and whatever else you may find), or through them becoming his with me as intermediary, I may name you as the donor and tell him that you’ve seen something of his work and would like to make his acquaintance, or something like that. In short, I just mean that if you’re put in touch with him one way or another I believe you’ll find in him someone with whom you’ll want to keep in touch and probably become real friends. Today I sent you a roll of woodcuts. They’re the double-page engravings from The Graphic. I have more of them, but some are probably not suitable for rolling up, since they’re mounted and have had tears repaired and are less important. But these are the sheets I believe you certainly don’t have as yet, and all 
   those that I would give to Van der W., provided you already had them. And you can verify whether or not you already have them and if you do, return them. You can sort the others out later, but I think it would be good to have a look at the most important woodcuts in this way, since if you come to visit we’ll need time for other things as well. Then at least that will be out of the way. As soon as I have time I’ll go through the smaller ones too and send you what I think you may not have for further verification as to whether or not you do.  For now from the smaller ones I’m adding just 2 Lançons which, since they’re French, might get forgotten later when I’m sorting The Graphics but which will undoubtedly please you, at least if you don’t already have them. Isn’t Board School by Holl superb? and Ploughing by Small3 and Caxton printing? You doubtless have winter weather again in Utrecht. Enclosed is a scratch out of the window. I always find it wonderfully cosy to sit by a fire in the dusk and to look through the window at a snow-covered landscape. I’ve also found that natural chalk here in town. It’s an article that was practically unknown to me until now. Now, though, I find it isn’t that rare — and you probably know it and already have it. If not, I think it a singular medium in which to draw. Adieu, old chap, a handshake in thought. Write soon, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
    My dear friend Rappard — Thanks for your letter, I was interested to learn that you’re again working on your painting The tile painters. In your letter I also found something about your coming here, and that was all the more reason to send you the duplicate woodcuts I still have left quickly, since I believe you would rather not wait any longer than necessary. At any rate after seeing them, you’ll regard various prints as not unwelcome possessions, I imagine. I’ve also taken The Graphic Portfolio apart and inserted it between my loose prints. This is why you already have Low lodging house by Herkomer, and several of the best of this consignment too. I’m sending you the ordinary impressions of some prints that I obtained in duplicate in this way, and in the case of some the prints from the book itself, which are printed not from the clichés but from the blocks themselves. In this consignment you’ll at last find something by Boyd Houghton, namely Shaker Evans, Liverpool harbour, Mail in the wilderness6 and Niagara falls. Once you’ve seen my Boyd Houghtons from the first year of The Graphic you will better understand what I wrote to you about the importance of this master’s work. Van der Weele saw them this week and was also struck by them.
   This week I worked on drawings of figures with wheelbarrows8 — perhaps for lithography as well — yet what do I know of how it will turn out? — I just carry on drawing. As I wrote, Van der Weele came by this week — I was just working with a model — and we held a viewing from The Graphic on a wheelbarrow that I had drawn with the model. One sheet that we paid particular attention to was by Boyd Houghton — I wrote to you about it at the time — it shows a corridor at the offices of The Graphic at Christmas. The draughtsmen’s models come to wish them a merry Xmas and no doubt receive a tip. Most of the models are disabled — a man on crutches leads the way — holding on to his coat-tail is a blind person with someone else on his back who can’t walk at all — his coat-tail is held by a second blind person who is followed by an injured person with a bandage round his head, behind whom yet more come trudging along. I asked Van der Weele — Tell me, do we take models often ENOUGH??? Van der W. replied: When Israëls was at my studio lately and saw my big painting of the sand-carts, he said: ‘Now above all take plenty of models’. Now I believe that many people would use more models if they had more money to spend — but still, as long as we always spend on them every 10 stuivers we can spare. It would be wonderful if people joined forces and there was a place where models would rendezvous each day, as at The Graphic 
   in the past. Anyway, be that as it may, let’s keep up each other’s enthusiasm, and let’s encourage each other, as far as we can, to carry on working. Not in the direction of pleasing dealers or the ordinary art lovers but in the direction of manly strength, truth, loyalty, honesty. Which are all directly connected, in my view, with working with models. It seems that everything one makes in this way is doomed to be called ‘disagreeable’, but I believe this far from imaginary but definitely existing prejudice ought to give way all the same before the attempts of the painters against it, provided the painters are agreed on this between themselves and support and help each other, and don’t allow the dealers to be the only ones who speak to the public, but put a word in for themselves now and again. For while I’m prepared to accept that what a painter says about his own work won’t always be understood, I still believe that in this way better seed would be scattered in the field of public opinion than the seeds the dealers and their associates are in the habit of sowing according to a conventional formula that’s always the same. These thoughts naturally bring me to the field of exhibitions. You work for exhibitions — fine — I myself am decidedly not at all fond of exhibitions.
   I used to be fonder of them in the past than I am now — I don’t know why this is — in the past I viewed exhibitions from a different angle — perhaps in the past I had ample occasion to see behind the scenes of certain affairs connected to exhibitions &c. — and perhaps it isn’t just nonchalance on my part that I believe that many are mistaken regarding the results of an exhibition. I don’t want to discuss it further now, other than to say that I myself would have more faith in a coming together of painters through mutual sympathy and similarity of purpose and warm friendship and loyalty than in a coming together of their works by means of exhibitions. This is why, when I see paintings hung together in the same room, I don’t yet venture to conclude that a spirit of unity and a respect for each other and a certain healthy collaboration exists among those who made the aforementioned paintings &c. I regard this last point — the existence or non-existence of these things — as being of such great weight that little else qualifies as possibly being important, other than in connection with this spiritual unity, and whatever other matters, important in themselves, there may be apart from that, no surrogate can make up for the lack of that unity, and the lack of that is a lack of firm ground under one’s feet. I don’t have the least desire for exhibitions &c. to stop, but I do desire a reform or rather renewal and strengthening of the associations and the collaboration between painters, which would certainly have the kind of influence that would make even exhibitions beneficial. As for your Tile painters — I was interested to hear that you’re working on it again — I’m especially interested in what it’s like and what it will become. I take an interest in everything to do with this painting or with your other paintings, and see something of them and hear about them with sympathy — but whether or not they go to an exhibition matters as little to me as what kind of frame you have them in. Well, adieu — write again soon. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I dislike writing or talking about technique in general, Rappard — although all the same I sometimes long to talk about how to realize some idea or other that I might have, be it with you or with someone else, and I don’t take the practical value of such discussions lightly. However, this latter doesn’t alter the first thought — which perhaps I’m not expressing properly. That first thought — I can’t exactly put it into words — is based not on something negative but on something positive. In the positive awareness that art is something larger and loftier than our own skill or learning or knowledge. That art is something which, although produced by human hands, is not wrought by the hands alone but wells up from a deeper source in our soul, and that I find something in dexterity and technical knowledge about art that reminds me of what, in religion, they’d call self-righteousness. My sympathies in the literary as well as the artistic sphere are drawn most strongly to those artists in whom I see the soul most at work. Israëls, for instance, is a clever technician, but Vollon is equally so — I like Israëls even more than Vollon, though, because in Israëls I see something more and something very different from the masterly rendering of fabrics, something very different from the light and shade, something very different from the colour — yet that something very different being achieved by that accurate rendering of the effect of light, fabric, colour. Eliot really has that ‘something different’, which I see, as I said, in Israëls much more than in Vollon, and Dickens has it too. Does it lie in the choice of subjects? No, that too is another consequence. And what I’m getting at, among other things, is that Eliot is masterly in execution, but above and beyond that is that extra something of singular genius of which I would say: perhaps one improves by reading these books — or, these books have the power to invigorate.
   Without meaning to I wrote a lot about exhibitions there, actually I barely think about them. Now I do happen to be thinking about them, and I view my thoughts with a degree of surprise. I wouldn’t be expressing them fully enough if I didn’t add that there’s something so thoroughly honest and good in some paintings that, whatever is done with them — whether they fall into good or into bad — into honest or dishonest hands — something good comes from them. ‘Let your light shine before men’12 is something that I believe is every painter’s duty, but — it doesn’t, in my view, immediately follow that letting the light shine before men has to be done in exhibitions — I have to tell you that, rather than wanting to hide the candle under the bed instead of putting it in a candlestick, I wish there were more and better opportunities than exhibitions to bring art to the people. Anyway, enough of that. I recently re-read Eliot’s Felix Holt, The radical. This book has been very well translated into Dutch. I hope you know it — if you don’t know it, see if you can’t get hold of it somewhere. There are certain ideas about life in it that I find outstanding — profound things said in a plain way — it’s a book written with great spirit, and various scenes are described exactly as Frank Holl or someone like him would draw them. It’s a similar conception and outlook. There aren’t many writers who are as thoroughly sincere and good as Eliot. This book, The radical, isn’t as well known in Holland as, say, her Adam Bede, and her scenes from clerical life aren’t very well known either — more’s the pity, in the same way that it’s a great pity that not everyone knows Israëls’s work. My dear friend Rappard, I received the package of woodcuts on 30 March. Because there was no letter with them, I waited a few days to see if you would write. Now, though, I’m writing a few words to say many thanks for this consignment and to tell you that I found several sheets in it that I didn’t already have (including a Ghost story by Thomas, Xmas carol by Gilbert, the Oberländer, In the church3 &c.), and have given the rest to Van der Weele, who was very pleased with them.  I imagine you’re very busy with your painting for the exhibition.  When everything to do with that is over and done with, I very much look forward to a vigorous resumption of our correspondence on lithography and black and white in general, and no less — if possible — to a meeting with you.  I write only briefly this time, because I understand you’re busy. 
   But just this one thing. What would you think of the following method for drawings in Black and white? Make a drawing in either pencil or charcoal. Work it up — as far as possible, but without worrying about the weakness and inadequacy of the effect.  When one is ready, put a little ordinary PRINTER’S INK on a palette, a little Cassel earth, for example, and white — oil paint.  With this — mixing the colours and the printer’s ink, which is as thick as tar in its natural state, with TURPENTINE (no oil, of course) — one begins to tackle the original drawing again (with the brush, naturally). This is something I’ve tried out lately.
   It goes without saying that the printer’s ink — diluted with more or less turpentine (one can make it so thin that one can do highly transparent washes with it — at the same time, using it more thickly, one can make the deepest tones of black with it) is the main ingredient one uses. I believe this is a route by which one can do many things. Anyway, more about this later — I myself am exploring.  The drawing I’m working on in this way at present is an orphan man standing beside a coffin — in what they call ‘the dead house’. Adieu, with a handshake, and thanking you again for the package. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Naturally you could do an experiment with just printer’s ink and turpentine to make it simpler.  I don’t mean autographic ink this time, but ordinary printer’s ink. You may already have it, but otherwise you can get it at any book printer’s.  In my experience this printer’s ink takes remarkably well to the rough grain of a certain paper which they call torchon here (but it’s absolutely not Whatman torchon), and which Smulders has recently had delivered in two formats. The large one at 3. guilders a quire. My dear friend Rappard. I received your telegram this morning. I was on the point of coming to you when I heard you were indisposed. But on reflection I changed my mind because I thought that the doctor might take the view that it wouldn’t be good for you to talk, &c.  I believe otherwise that you yourself would not object — I too wouldn’t be at all concerned that it would harm you. On the contrary indeed, there’s something peculiar in the temperament of every painter. Momentary weakness, nervousness, melancholy are often caused by the effort of working — at the same time, though, there’s a kind of rebound, and the weakness &c. &c. is cured precisely by making an effort.  If someone is weak and has had more than enough of reasoning and discussing with friends, it might do him good to be solitary for a while, but as far as I know this isn’t the case with you. 
   So I considered coming to you.  But I thought, Rappard has fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, maids, servants, and I don’t know what else at home, and they can all be on sentry duty to keep him quiet if the doctor has said something like that. Now if one arrives at such a moment, the pleasure is gone and you sit facing each other in embarrassment. For my part, though, I tell you frankly, at times I clearly feel the two forces of exhaustion and recovery in my own temperament due to one and the same cause, the effort put into work. And I trust in this so much, not only for myself but for others too, that when I was ill last year, for example, I brazenly acted against the doctor’s advice in some respects, not because I thought his advice was wrong 
   or that I knew better, but because I reasoned to myself: I live to paint and not primarily to conserve my constitution. Sometimes the mysterious words, whosoever will lose his life shall find it, are as clear as daylight. I was cured MORE SPEEDILY than a few others of whom I know how long they took to recover from the same thing. But — dear friend — I write what I would otherwise certainly say to you — save your strength in the sense of not expending it on matters that don’t lead directly to your goal. I say the same of church ornaments as of making decorations. In my view this is using up powder on something that may be worth a shot of powder in itself, if need be, from someone who has a full cartridge box and can refill it when it’s empty, but — my dear friend — not a cartridge from a soldier on whose alertness important matters may depend and whose position puts greater responsibility on his shoulders than on other people’s. What’s permitted to others may be reprehensible in you, since in this case the better is the enemy of the good. Ergo, save yourself for the better.
   Do you share my opinion as to your responsibility and what depends on your post? I’m not certain about it. There are two points of view with everybody: what one is, what one could be. We may not confine ourselves in the first, it seems to me, with a ‘clear’ conscience. We should feel the second as a formidable reality above us since, imperfect and full of faults as we are, we’re never justified in stifling the ideal, and what extends into the infinite as if it were no concern of ours. I have a few reasons for finding your post highly important in the circumstances. Perhaps my feeling towards you is more sombre as a result. I wonder, what will R. do? Which side will he choose? But now isn’t the moment to philosophize about that. So to business. I have a particular desire to meet you soon. I’ve seen absolutely nothing by you for a year, longer even, because I didn’t see anything last year either when you were here. Also, you’ve seen little of my work — nothing other than the lithographs.  So, if you agree, we must arrange things so that we see each other, and visit each other in turn. So my proposal is that you let me know on which day there would be no obstacle to my coming to your studio for a morning. As long as you have these symptoms of coughing blood, I don’t think it exaggerated to say that there are objections to your coming here. So let’s agree to postpone that until these symptoms have gone completely. But the very first day that you’re back to your normal ways without disagreeing with your doctor, I’ll come to see you as soon as I hear one word from you. As you see, I’m writing to you even before receiving the letter mentioned in your telegram. But I don’t expect it to change much in this plan, but rather to endorse it.
   Don’t imagine I’m against all decorations or ornaments — but I’m against them at this time and in the circumstances we’re now facing here in Holland. I’m not against them if a certain surplus of vigour is absorbed in that direction at a time of great enthusiasm and a spirit of energy and renaissance. But I’m against them at a time when enthusiasm and energy aren’t exactly the prevailing mood — especially among the young — so let those who have energy concentrate.  There’s a time to be merry but there’s also a time to be severe. Truly, then it’s necessary that one does not share the confidence about everything going well, which is more or less the convention at present, and could end up in a periwig age — when they drank a glass &c. and left things as they were. When there is decline — then no ornaments, please — but a quest for inner fellowship with ‘the old hands of yesterday’, and ignore the present. Some matters, my dear friend, take precedence in my mind over one’s own private concerns or private difficulties. These last are also not the immediate motive if I desire to speak to you. Thus now I’ve talked about other things before getting round to thanking you for being ready to help me, which reassures me greatly and will spare me having to take distasteful measures. Thank you for that. If I talk about things in general, actually I detest doing such a thing. It will be the same if I come to you — I can’t conceal the fact that I, for one, can’t see the future clearly, and consider it doubtful whether I’ll be able to do what I propose to do. So I seek to have your advice to perhaps get some light. I believe you have a certain eye for my work, and in some cases 
   your judgement could be of great use to me when I have the studies for something, for example, in shaping them into the final whole. Now at the moment I have many studies and 2 or 3 more important compositions are dawning in my mind for which I probably have most of the material in my studies. Precisely because I value your opinion, it’s necessary for you to know something of my thoughts too. And I believe you probably have enough power of contemplation to understand my vision even when you don’t agree with me about everything. If I have something against a new movement, it isn’t at all that of Israëls, Mauve and Maris. No, that’s simply the best in my view, but something has since arisen from it which, while resembling it, is in fact directly opposed to those masters — and that’s what I’m against. Van der Weele, for instance, is more serious and sticks to a straight line. I saw his studies last Sunday. Now I believe that you also have a straight line, but I wonder whether some things aren’t more deviations in the direction described. I’m ready to withdraw this opinion, but that’s how it appears to me. Now, for my part I too am looking for that line which I think is the best, that of let’s say Israëls, Mauve, Maris. I don’t even know how far I’ve advanced along it — much less how far I’ll yet advance — but I’ve done my best at it and shall continue to do my best. And this being so, if, for example, I see objections to your decorations, it’s as far from my intention as the north is from the south to do this in a schoolmasterly way or tone, but only as one who is himself searching for something true and sound — and serious not because I’ve already found it but serious because I’m myself searching for it.  And all I think regarding not only you, but certainly myself no less, is that we must be on our guard against the diffuse and search for concentration and pith. And if I come to you — truly, it’s with a view to what concerns practice, and not about theory or philosophy, that I want to talk to you. With a view to practice, as prosaic as Monday morning.
   You write about a beautiful print in The Graphic by Howard Pyle. If you mean a composition that recalls Ter Borch or Nicolaes de Keyser — Penn and the colonists — it struck me too — so much so that I ordered that issue. Yes, it’s deuced beautiful. In the same way I took an issue of London News for the sake of a sheet by King — Workmen in a wagon of the Underground Railway. I’ve also subscribed to Dumas’s le Salon 1883, of which the first issue is out at 1 franc and which will be complete in 12 monthly instalments. I greatly regret that you didn’t come after all, but it wasn’t your fault. Up to now I had some qualms about coming to you, because so many prefer not to see me and I generally don’t look forward to paying visits. And part of the reason for that is also because I’ve taken the woman and her two children into my house, and they think they can’t decently have anything to do with me. But having provisionally learned from you yourself that your opinion is different from that of others, I believe I can give up my qualms. I deal with it by not seeking out those who avoid me for this reason, 
   I prefer to stay away from places rather than to be unwelcome. All the more so since I can slightly, slightly, slightly, but only a very tiny bit, excuse the prejudice of those who are just observing or trying to observe social conventions and accept them as they are, above all because I regard them as weak and don’t want to fight, at least not attack. In this respect, too, I CERTAINLY save my cartridges. Is this too pedantic? Take me as I am and let us agree that I’ll hear from you when I can visit you without going against what your doctor prescribes. And thank you again for being willing to help me, and your letter will be welcome when it comes, but if your condition means that you must put off writing, then let it wait. Adieu, with a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Coming home just now I found your postcard, which was delivered this morning soon after I left — I see that, apart from your model this afternoon, you also had an appointment for this morning. And I’m sorry you didn’t tell me this — we could have gone there together if need be. For the rest, the pleasure of having seen your work is no small thing for me and I’m pleased to have visited you, if I haven’t upset your plans too much. It wasn’t my fault, though, for I hadn’t yet received your postcard, and have only just found it.  Your work, again, I think it very good — above all the sketch of the woman spinning, also very good — it’s the real thing. I wish you had a charcoal drawing of Tile painters2 as well, I suggest you consider doing one. Why? — because compositions like that most certainly also work well when painted, and are truer and raised to a higher level in some respects in that state. 
   Yet the Black and White or Light and Shade of it acquires a peculiar charm in itself and stands by itself — lending itself at the same time to possible reproduction, photos of Tile painters are bound to fail compared with the painting because of the blue coming out as white.  The heads (studies) of the blind men seem outstanding to me. Do you agree that we hereby more or less resolve to visit each other again, turn and turn about, before the end of the current year?  Here’s a passage from Dickens which I think says very expressively what a figure painter feels while working on a composition. ‘I was occupied with this Story during many workinghours of two years. I must have been very ill employed, if I could not leave its merits and demerits as a whole to express themselves — on its being read as a whole. But, as it isn’t unreasonable to suppose that I may have held its various threads with a more continuous attention than any one else can have given to them during its desultory publication, it isn’t unreasonable to ask that the weaving may be looked at in its complete state, and with the pattern finished.’ Preface Little Dorrit. 
   Here you see, my dear friend, beautifully expressed, how a figure painter deserves to be regarded — as a whole.  Today I saw you in that way, and it has confirmed my sympathy for you.  For your part, continue to regard me as a whole too, which many others do not.  What I also think very good is that one sees books in your studio, Hugo, Zola, Dickens – figure painter books. Will send you Erckmann-Chatrian, Histoire d’un paysan to read.  The French Revolution — that is the centre — the constitution of 1789 the modern gospel, no less sublime than that of Year 1. And how one can be a figure painter and not feel anything of that I cannot understand — and find something empty in the studios of those kinds of figure painters if the modern writings are absent. And I believe that’s your impression too.
   Do you know what I didn’t take? The miners’ strike by Roll, which I believe you have in duplicate. I have it myself but it was meant for Van der Weele, who, between you and me, badly needs to see some foreign compositions in my view, and is I think somewhat weighed down by Dutch prejudices — although in his large painting8 he wrests free of them. As for printer’s ink, I wanted to say, try splashing and smearing with it — at random and from the imagination as it were — on a piece of paper or an old study, just for the effect. But gently — with turpentine — then I believe you’ll see things in it that will prove useful. Your study for which I posed9 looked very good when it was properly dry, but I believe it would have been even better if it had been prepared with charcoal. And try washing with a brush and water in a scratch done with lithographic crayon. If you take the trouble, you’ll certainly find things that are very useful and practical with the printer’s ink — probably more and better than I’ve found so far.  How beautiful those illustrations are by Lhermitte, Perret, Bastien-Lepage that you have! If I were you I’d do even more of those fine heads like the blind men. I’ll also try it out with a finer pencil — — adieu — with a handshake.  Ever yours, Vincent As to writers, don’t you agree that one doesn’t know writers like Dickens, Balzac, Hugo, Zola until one has more or less full knowledge of their work? I think that the same applies to Michelet and Erckmann-Chatrian too. 
   I refuse to accept that a painter may or must do nothing but paint. I mean that while many regard, for instance, reading books or something else as what they’d call a waste of time, it seems to me on the contrary that — far from working less or less well if one attempts to learn about another area that’s nonetheless directly related — one works more and better as a result — and at any rate the point of view from which one sees things and one’s approach to life is a matter of importance and a great influence on the work. The more one loves, the more one will act, I believe, for love that is only a feeling I wouldn’t even consider to be love. Well, I hope this consignment of wood engravings will be to your taste. Return the ones you already have together with the others when it’s convenient, then I’ll give them to Van der Weele. I’ve sorted them out as carefully as possible — and as far as I can make out these are all the duplicates. There are a few French ones among them too. We can check the rest when you come, sooner or later. Then you’ll certainly have a lot more prints to look at which, sadly, I don’t have in duplicate.  Enjoy them — and write again soon.  My dear friend Rappard, I need to tell you again that the visit to you raised my spirits enormously. I intend to make a start on some larger compositions too, and I’ve already started on one of them.  That is peat diggers in the dunes. About 1 metre by 1/2 metre.  Do you recall my telling you that there was such a beautiful sight there in the dunes? It looks a little like the raising of a barricade. As soon as I left you I started work, for it was already fairly ripe in my head. Just as I’ve already thought a lot about some other compositions, and already have studies for them too.  If I hadn’t had the money from you, however, I wouldn’t have been able to do this, for example, at this time.  I’ve had a wooden passe-partout made like yours but no frame. I’m thinking of giving the passe-partout, unpainted as yet, the colour of walnut. Like your frame. The effect is pleasing when one encloses the drawing and as soon as I saw your drawings I decided to have a similar passe-partout.
   In Harper’s Weekly I found an illustration by Reinhart, by far the best I’ve seen by him up to now, ‘Washed ashore’. A body has been washed up, a man is kneeling beside it to see who it is, a few fishermen and women give information about the shipwreck victim to a gendarme. So it looks somewhat like Victim of a shipwreck3 that you have, but the drawing by R. has something of Régamey, for example. It’s a very fine print.  What beautiful things there are to be found, don’t you think? I’ve now sketched the drawing Peat diggers in charcoal, natural chalk and autographic ink. I haven’t yet used the strongest strengths of printer’s ink on it.  So it doesn’t yet look as forceful as I imagine it could be. The only thing I have against charcoal is that it wipes off so easily; one loses things one has found because of this wiping off unless one works very carefully.  And I feel a need not to have to be all that careful.  I have a few plans for large drawings, my dear friend, for which you might perhaps have some sympathy.  I wish you had read Les misérables, then I would be better able to discuss it with you, for you might perhaps be struck by the same things that keep coming into my mind. That wouldn’t surprise me. 
   I knew that book long ago, but many things from it keep coming to mind now that I’ve read it again.  Both you and I learned some history at school, but if you’re like me that’s not enough for you, as well as being too dry and too conventional.  Now for my part I’d wish to have a clear view of the period from 1770, say, to the present. The French Revolution is the greatest modern event on which everything turns, in the present age too.  When I read something like Dickens’s London and Paris (Tale of two cities)6 and reflect on it, I believe one could choose such splendid subjects for drawings from that period of the Revolution. Not directly related to actual history so much as to incidents of ordinary life and the look of things as they were in the past. Take the drawing by Howard Pyle and that other one by Abbey that I showed you recently, Xmas in old New York, Xmas in old Virginia.  Now, starting in those days and letting one’s thoughts wander up to today, one surveys a period in which everything has changed. And several moments are particularly interesting. And one finds them described so compellingly and so thoroughly in various French and English books that it becomes possible to picture the things of the past clearly.
   Dickens, who usually described his own times, couldn’t help writing the Tale of two cities, and one sees repeatedly in his work that he inserts descriptions from earlier days, for instance a description of the London streets before there were street-lamps. Question: could one find Dutch subjects from, say, the time when the first street-lamps were put up or from before they existed?  Just imagine a pew or a funeral, say, from the year 1815. A removal, a promenade, a street on a winter’s day from that period or a little later.  In Les misérables, although it deals with a later period, I find what I am seeking, aspects of the past that stimulate me to imagine how things looked in the age of my great-grandfather, or no further back than my grandfather even. Quatre-vingt-treize by Hugo was the one that was illustrated by all The Graphic draughtsmen together. Caldecott also does it so truly.  I’d like to see what impression Quatre-vingt-treize and Les misérables made on you. I don’t doubt for a moment that you’d find them beautiful. When I visited you I saw a few parts of the city which I imagined to myself enlivened by figures from ancient times. Well, we’ll probably talk about drawings from an earlier era another time. I hope it turns out that, as you said, you come here again this summer. It isn’t impossible that my brother from Paris may also visit you this summer. I would like him to see your work again and I would like us to come to you together while he’s here. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Was writing a letter to you when the post brought your most welcome letter just a moment ago. I’m pleased you’ve made progress with your drawing, I didn’t doubt that you would, by the way, for you’d made a manly start.  Well, let me begin by saying that I think what you say about the English draughtsmen is entirely correct and entirely right. I saw it in your work, exactly what you say. Well, I take the same view. On the bold outlines in particular. Take the etching by Millet, The diggers, take an engraving by Albrecht Dürer, take above all the large woodcut by Millet himself, The shepherdess, and then one sees fully what can be expressed by such an outline.  And as you say, one then has the feeling ‘that’s how I’d always have wanted to do it if I’d always gone my own way’ &c. That’s well said, old chap, and spoken like a man.  Now, what I also find an example of singularly robust, forceful drawing is Leys’s paintings, particularly the series of decorations for his dining room. The walk in the snow, the skaters, the reception, the table, the servant. And Degroux has it as well and Daumier has it as well.  Israëls himself and sometimes, sometimes Mauve and Maris4 too, cannot resist forceful outline, but don’t do it like Leys or like Herkomer.  And when one hears them, they really don’t want to know, and talk most about tone and colour. Yet in some charcoal drawings Israëls used lines reminiscent of Millet. I for one declare to you frankly that, with all the love and respect I have for these masters, I find it a pity that they, especially Mauve and Maris, don’t point out what can be done with the outline more often when talking to others, and recommend drawing carefully and softly.
   And so it is that these days watercolour is the order of the day and considered to be the most expressive medium, and in my view too little effort goes into Black and White, to the point even that there’s a certain antipathy to it. In watercolour there’s no black, so to speak, and that’s the basis for people talking about ‘those black things’. All the same, there’s no need to spend the whole of this letter writing about that.  Wanted to inform you that at present I have 4 drawings on the easel. Peat diggers5 — Sand quarry6 — Dung-heap7 — Loading coal.  I even did the dung-heap twice; the first became too worn to continue working on.  I didn’t dare work on them much with turpentine and printer’s ink, have used charcoal, lithographic crayon and autographic ink so far. Except in the sketch for the dung-heap that got too worn — I tackled that with them, with not unfavourable results. It became black, but still some of the freshness came back into it, and now I see possibilities for working in it again, whereas before the printer’s ink came on it I saw no possibility of that. I’ve worked hard since I visited you, I hadn’t composed for so long and had done a great many studies, so once I began I went at it furiously. 
   Several mornings I was already at work at 4 o’clock. I would like it immensely if you saw them sometime, for I can make no sense of what Van der Weele said about them, the only one to have seen them. Van der Weele’s judgement was rather sympathetic, but he said of the Sand quarry that there were too many figures in it. The composition wasn’t simple. He said, look, draw that one little fellow with his wheelbarrow on a dyke in the evening set against the light sky, how beautiful that would be, for instance, and now it lacked cohesion.  Well, then I showed him the drawing by Caldecott, Brighton Highroad, and said, do you mean that it’s absolutely not permitted to put many figures in a composition and to make it highly complicated? Leaving aside my drawing, tell me what you think of this composition. Well, he said, I don’t find that beautiful either but, he added, I’m speaking personally and can only speak personally. And that’s not what I like or what I look at. Well, I thought that was rather well said, but you understand that I didn’t find in him that awareness of the question that I sought. But for the rest he’s a solid fellow, and I had some very pleasant excursions with him and he showed me some devilishly beautiful things.  It was also during a walk with him that I saw the sand quarry, but that time he hardly looked at it and I went back alone the next day. I drew the sand quarry with a lot of figures, because sometimes there really are a great many fellows toiling away in those sandpits, for example in the winter and the autumn they provide work there in the name of the city for those who have no work. And then it’s wonderfully pleasing there.
   I’ve had several fine models of late. A superb grass-mower, a splendid country lad, exactly like one of Millet’s figures.  A fellow with a wheelbarrow — you may remember me drawing his head in Sunday clothes with a Sunday patch over his blind eye.  Now I have him in his everyday suit, and it’s perhaps hard to believe that it’s the same man who posed for the two figures.  These four big drawings are 1 metre by 1/2 metre.  I feel happy using a brown passe-partout with a very deep black inside edge. Then many blacks that would appear too black in a white passe-partout look grey and the whole remains clear.  By Jove, I wish you could see them, not because I myself think they are good, but I would like to hear your thoughts about them, even though I’m not yet satisfied with them. To my taste they aren’t yet figure drawings in the true sense of the term, although they are still figure drawings, but I wanted to express the outlines of actions and structure even more squarely and boldly.  What you write about feeling that you’re now on a road and not on byways or side roads seems to me absolutely right. Have a similar feeling myself, because this last year I’ve concentrated more on the figure than in the past.  Be assured, if you believe I have eyes to see, that there is certainly sentiment in your figures; what you make is healthy and manly, do not doubt yourself in that respect and, precisely because you do not doubt, dash it on without hesitating.  The studies of heads for the blind fellows seem superb to me.
   Wanted to tell you about a type of pencil by Faber12 that I’ve found. Here you see the thickness of the cross-section.  They’re soft and better quality than the carpenter’s pencils, produce a marvellous black and are very agreeable to work with for large studies.  I used it to draw a woman sewing on grey papier sans fin and got an effect like lithographic crayon. These pencils are made of soft wood, dyed green on the outside, cost 20 cents apiece.  Before I forget — I wanted to borrow the issues of Harper’s Magazine you have to read the articles about Holland that Boughton and Abbey illustrated. I’ll send you a package with the old loose issues that I have with illustrations by Howard Pyle &c. so that you can look through them at your leisure. And shall add Erckmann-Chatrian, Histoire d’un paysan illustrated by Schuler, and enclose several illustrations by Green that you will remember I promised. If you still have duplicates, add them to the Harpers (at least if you can do without the latter for about a fortnight so that I can read them), and Zola’s book about Manet if you’ve finished it.  I’m sorry that your health isn’t yet in order, but I think that what will cheer you up more than the baths or whatever it is they do there in Soden is to make solid progress with your drawings. I reckon you’ll be longing for your studio as soon as you’re out of it. I know that Mauve became terribly melancholy during a journey to a similar kind of factory, speaking with all due respect. As you know, I’m very unbelieving in matters of this kind, and can sympathize with Bräsig in Reuter’s Gedroogde kruiden as regards what I think that authority calls ‘the water art’.
   How beautiful Fritz Reuter’s work is. I do think you’ll find the Erckmann-Chatrian beautiful. Must also tell you that I recently got hold of a splendid old Scheveningen woman’s cape and a hat, but the hat isn’t beautiful. And I’m also to get a skipper’s jacket with a stand-up collar and short sleeves. I’d dearly like to see your charcoal drawing, perhaps when my brother comes — I don’t know exactly when yet — I could go with him to Brabant and then come for a look while passing Utrecht. Perhaps if I can manage it I’ll come anyway sometime, for I would like to see it.  For your part, make sure you come to The Hague again, for the wedding you spoke of then. If I carry on having such success as just recently in finding models, I’ll certainly do one or two things in large drawings this summer.  Now I want to continue with those I’m working on to get them to the same level, if possible, by the time my brother comes.  In Harper’s Weekly I see a very true thing after Smedley — a black figure of a man on a white sandy road. He calls it ‘a generation ago’. It’s the figure of a kind of minister perhaps; the impression it made on me was: yes, my grandfather was like that. I wish I had done it. In the same number after Abbey two girls fishing on the bank of a ditch with pollard willows. In Harper’s they’re both just croquis in a review of an exhibition.
   I would send you croquis of the drawings but I haven’t got much time.  I asked permission to draw in the old men’s and women’s home here but that has been refused me. Still, there are more homes in the villages around here. But here I knew a few people whom I could use as models. I was there, though, to have a look, and saw among others a gardener next to an old, crooked apple tree that was very real. Well, there’s my model. Adieu, send the Harpers if you can do without them, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I still wanted to write again while you’re travelling. Thanks for the consignment of books. I would like to apply to Zola’s Mes haines Zola’s own words about Hugo, ‘I should like to demonstrate that, given such a man on such a subject, the result could not be another book than the one it is’, also Zola’s own words on the same occasion: ‘I shall not cease to repeat, the criticism of this book, as it has been made, seems to me a monstrous injustice’. I would truly like to begin by saying that I’m not one of those who blame Zola for this book. Through it I’m getting to know Zola, I’m getting to know Zola’s weak side — insufficient understanding of painting — prejudices instead of correct judgement in this special case. But, my dear friend, should I get irritated with a friend on account of a fault in him? — far from it. On the contrary, he is all the dearer to me because of his fault. So I read the articles about the Salon with a most curious feeling. I think it utterly wrong, entirely mistaken, except in part the appreciation of Manet — I too think Manet is clever — but very interesting, Zola on art, interesting in the same way as, for instance, a landscape by a figure painter: it isn’t his genre, it’s superficial, incorrect, but what an approach — not carried through — so be it — not quite clear — so be it — but at any rate it makes one think and is original and tingling with life. But it’s mistaken and most incorrect, and rests on shifting sands.  Most interesting to hear him on Erckmann-Chatrian. Here he doesn’t lash out so wildly as when he talks about paintings, and his criticism is sometimes deuced telling. I permit him with pleasure to accuse Erckm.-C. of mixing a measure of egotism into his morality. Furthermore, he’s right to say that Erckm. becomes a simpleton when he starts describing Parisian life and that he isn’t familiar with it. A question, however, inevitably raised by this criticism: is Zola familiar with the Alsace, and if he were, wouldn’t he take more interest in Erckmann’s characters, who are as fine as Knaus and Vautier?
         As for the grain of egotism in most of the characters whose side Erckm. appears to choose, in the old Rabbi David and in Wagner and in Thérèse, I believe the somewhat egotistical Erckmann-Chatrian becomes sublime5, and so for me he is extraordinary. What Zola has in common with Balzac is that he knows little about painting. I think two artist types in Zola’s works, Claude Lantier in Le ventre de Paris and one in Thérèse Raquin, are just like pale ghosts of Manet, Impressionists of a sort. Anyway. Well, Balzac’s painters are awfully heavy going, very tiresome.  Now I’d like to carry on talking about this but I’m no critic. But I’m glad, I just wanted to add, that he scores a hit on Taine, who deserves it because he’s sometimes irritating with his mathematical analysis. Still, through that he (Taine) arrives at curiously deep pronouncements. For example, I read a remark of his — about Dickens and Carlyle: ‘the essence of the English character is the absence of happiness.’9 Now I don’t want to insist on the greater or lesser accuracy, but just say that such words are evidence of very deep reflection, looking into the darkness with one’s eyes until one sees something more in it where others no longer see anything. I find that remark beautiful, extraordinarily beautiful, and it says more to me than a thousand other remarks on the subject, and in this case Taine deserves our respect.  Well, am glad to be able to look at the Boughtons – Abbeys at my leisure for once. I think In the potato field is the finest of all, and the Bellringers by Abbey. Text a little dry, a little too full of stories about hotels and antique dealers12 — read it with pleasure. Why? For the same reason as the book by Zola. Because of the personality of the man who wrote it.  Have you noticed that Zola doesn’t even mention Millet? Yet I read a description by Zola of a country graveyard and a deathbed and funeral of an old peasant, which was as beautiful as if they were Millets. So this omission is probably a question of not being familiar with M.’s work.
   I can tell you that I’ve found an uncommonly beautiful print by T. Green, the brother or something of C.G. It’s a party at the Foundling Hospital in London, a sort of orphan girls at the table. Oh, you’ll be in raptures over it.  Also by him a smaller ‘A city congregation’, so delicately drawn, as exquisitely done as Braemar by our friend J. McL.R.  I found two more prints, The ascent of Mount Vesuvius19 and A game of football20 by this sphinx J. McL.R., whose name we’ve so far been unable to decipher but whom I assume to be a brother or at least a relative of W. M. Ridley. Both good, but not as beautiful as the Braemar coach. I also know a salmon fishers, by him and I have a ‘volunteers in the camp’ — the latter print enlightened me about the name.  Furthermore, a procession of monks in the snow by A. Hunt, as fine as a Legros. London Bridge and emigrants by W.M. Ridley, two markets by Buckman, drawn particularly broadly and boldly effective.  By Barnard, Hampstead Heath26 — First to come — Last to go. How the poor live.  By Hopkins, Children at the beach, very fine in tone;29 a beautiful sheet by Millais himself, Xmas stories. By Birket Foster, Winter landscapes, Christmas time, very cosy, two important Gavarnis of the highest quality, Porters of the market, Women of the market33 and The New Year’s presents.  Then Régameys — beautiful Japanese subjects35 and a very large print by him, a masterpiece, The diamond field, and another large composition too, The fatted ox.  And by M.F. a sheet of about medium size showing the treadmill in a prison, as beautiful as a Régamey. By I don’t know whom, a splendid thing about the steel mills in Sheffield called ‘The Fork-grinders’. It’s in the manner of Edmond Morin, namely his most compact and concise manner. As you see, this isn’t all that many, but they’re all beautiful things which I consider valuable additions. By Howard Pyle, a very beautiful female figure. By S. Read, fine landscapes too.  Yet more perhaps, but these are about the most important.
   How are you getting on with drawing on your travels, if you’ve already left? I’m working on the potato grubbers, also have a single figure of an old man and several rough studies of figures from the time of the potato harvest. A weed burner and a chap with a sack and one with a wheelbarrow &c. When you return from your travels I hope you go ahead with your visit quickly.  Then I also have another sower, perhaps the seventh or eighth figure I’ve done for it. This time I’ve placed him in the space for once, in a large field with clods of earth and a sky. I’d like to put to Zola the question that I’d like to put to some other people. Tell me, is it true that there’s no distinction between, say, a red ochre dish with a cod on it and, say, the figure of a digger or a sower? Is there or is there not a distinction between Rembrandt and Van Beijeren (just as gifted technically), between Vollon and Millet?  Have you already noticed that new magazine Pictorial News? Sometimes there are good things in it, but most aren’t very special. My dear friend, I wish we could spend a little more time together. But what can one do? Write again when you have the time and the inclination. The summer issues of The Graphic and London News aren’t particularly special in my view. The Graphic does, though, have a fine Caldecott, that’s the best thing. And several Reinharts, not the best. London News, Caton Woodvilles again. You’ll find the sheets I’m writing to you about more interesting. Diamond field by Régamey isn’t at all gripping at first sight, but one finds it more and more beautiful with time. The T. Greens are masterpieces. My brother writes to me about a particularly beautiful exhibition in Paris, called ‘The hundred masterpieces’. Adieu, my dear friend, have a good journey, remember to write if there’s time. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Dear Parents, I received your letters and I thank you for them. The death of Cousin Anna Tak touched me too; yes, it could have happened at any time. I sometimes thought that she wasn’t entirely happy, or rather, for my part I don’t doubt it for a moment. I think it must be difficult to be happy with a banker, less than ever nowadays. You will say that it isn’t so — but I just happen to have certain ideas about it in regard to the way of all businesses. There’s a certain sphere that it’s better to keep out of, in my view. To change the subject — the people of Het Heike cheated one another, and I wouldn’t swear that it never happens here. But as to the people of Het Heike, I believe that they have shown that, despite the way they may have cheated one another, despite this being taken for granted, when it comes down to it people like that are very united, taken as a whole. I found Het Heike a remarkable example of energy; the little houses each with a patch of green land, that poor little band battling together against the barrenness of the heath — I don’t deny their faults, but they’re by no means the first things that strike me. I had never thought about whether the people cheated one another here. Now that I come to think of it, well — it probably does happen sometimes — but generally what strikes me is the same as I saw on a small scale in Het Heike. It’s more spacious here and more interesting, and has more character. Something at least as attractive and orderly as an ants’ nest or beehive. So there you have things writ large — I find them admirable as they are — and as to how they might be — 
   I won’t deny that they could be better — but, as I said, I already see so much positive good here that I refrain from commenting, particularly since as yet I’m by no means able to distinguish coincidences from character flaws. I’ll have to see more before I can do that. Well, if I compare the population of a city and these people, I don’t hesitate for one moment in saying that these heathland people or peat workers seem better to me. Yes, the difference seems to me to be enormous, even if they cheat one another no less than on Het Heike, although I don’t say that they do, I don’t know yet. I recently spoke about something of the kind to the man I lodge with, who also farms — by chance, because he asked me what it was like in London, he’d heard so much about it. I told him that, to me, a simple peasant who worked and thought while he was working was the civilized man — that this has always been so, will always remain so, that here and there in the country one sees someone in whom one sees what that is, and in the city one finds a few among the very, very rare excellent people who are almost exactly as noble in a very different way. But that in my view it goes no further, and that generally speaking one has more chance of meeting a reasonable human being in the country than in the city. And also that I thought that the more one went to the big cities, the more one went into the darkness of uncivilization and stupidity and wickedness. He said that it actually appeared the same to him. 
   There is a difference, and in the country it is quieter, more peaceful, something better; even if they do cheat one another, they don’t do it as badly as in the city. We have, by turns, beautiful, clear autumn days here and stormy ditto. Actually I find the latter the most beautiful, even though they make it more awkward to work outdoors, even though it’s sometimes completely impossible to do so. All the same, going out and reworking a study one has made on a fine day in accordance with what one sees outdoors in the rain can be done, and it satisfies me. Don’t worry about my health, I’m taking care of myself, and in these early days here I’m even feeling better than in the last few months in The Hague, when I was much troubled by nervousness &c. And that has calmed down altogether. In my view, there’s nowhere one can think better than by a peasant hearth, with a baby in an old cradle beside it — and where one can see through the window a delicate green wheatfield and the alder bushes waving. I’m following the ploughmen a great deal at present and must get back there. Regards, dear parents — my overcoat is perfectly all right, the undervest is splendid. Believe me Your loving Vincent Dear Sir, I have received your letter. Please forgive me for having had to keep you waiting longer than was my intention. I have not been quite well for a while, and several other things have got in my way. I cannot yet say anything definite about my journey, and do not know when I will be back in The Hague again. Perhaps I will see you again before long, though, and otherwise I will try to send you some more very soon. However, the New Year is approaching and it is definitely not convenient at this moment. I respectfully remain, Your servant Vincent van Gogh As soon as I know something definite about my trip to Drenthe myself, namely how long I’ll be there, I’ll write and tell you. Would Kiesenberg be so good as to see whether it might be leaking on the drawings in the attic in this wet weather? I think it should be all right, though. Nuenen, Jan. 84 My dear friend Furnée, This morning I received your letter telling me of your rapidly approaching departure for the Indies. Little had I thought that this would be happening so soon. I sincerely hope that you will be able to feel at home in the Indies. Perhaps you will find this easier now than if you had stayed in Holland for a long time first, and had painted a lot in Holland. Then, once one is wholly and entirely immersed in the grey sadness here, one might perhaps find it difficult to get to grips with the nature of the East Indies. But in the circumstances, if you now try to get to grips completely with nature over there, I think that you will succeed in doing so. And who knows what curious, picturesque things you will find there. Many French and other painters profited by going to Algiers or Egypt, and I imagine that the Indies must produce somewhat similar effects. In the last few years, for instance, several painters went to China and Japan, and I saw very fine things from those countries. It pleases me so much that you are still keen to paint, and I believe that provided you persevere you can go a very long way. 
   Especially because you will always have to be outdoors a great deal in your job. Things are going quite well for me here in Brabant, anyway I find the countryside here very stimulating. Now, in these last few weeks I have made 4 watercolours of Weavers. And a few others of a timber sale, an interior with a seamstress, and a gardener, all watercolours. Herewith a few scratches of them.  
    
   Herewith another order for your father. Be so good as to pick out the watercolour brushes for me, not too thin and not too thick either. The sort one usually uses. Something like this  Well, my dear friend, I will always think back with great pleasure on many a walk that we took together last summer. And be assured that I won’t forget you, and that I would be much obliged to hear from you soon, once you’re over there. For my part I will send you some scratches of what I have in hand sometime. And so now, wishing you a safe journey and success in your undertakings, in particular success with the painting too. With a hearty handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent Would you please tell your father that I will be able to send His Hon. money by 20 January for what is still outstanding and for this order. My dear friend Rappard, Just a word to tell you something about what has been preoccupying all of us here these last few days. My mother had an accident getting out of the train, and a serious one at that — since she’s broken her right thighbone. The setting went pretty well, she’s calm and not in much pain. But I don’t have to tell you that it’s something which causes us all great concern. I’m just glad I’m here because, since my sisters are also weak, I can find plenty for me to do. My sisters are otherwise not doing badly. The one who’s usually in Soesterberg1 is the weakest. 
   I can hardly find words to describe how bravely the one who was at home when you were with us2 is bearing up these days. There’s still a lot to deal with regarding my mother — the doctor assures us that it can mend — but at best she won’t be able to walk again for six months, and even then one leg will always be shorter than the other. Imagine that there’s no doctor in this village (at least my father won’t have him), and so one has to come from Eindhoven, in a carriage every time? It’s a disaster — the consequences of which I find difficult to gauge. Anyway — we obviously have to live from one day to the next, in so far as sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Fortunately she remains calm and clear-headed, and so cooperates herself in keeping things quiet. 
   Write to me soon — have you started on anything new since I saw you? I’m still working on the weavers, but I’m afraid I’ll only be able to work half-time for a long while because of what has happened, which means that a great many other things have to be done. As I wrote to you, I’ve made various studies in watercolour directly from life. I’ll make a start on some watercolours after them, because I have to stay in the house most of the time now. My mother and my father send their regards too. My mother had just gone from Nuenen to Helmond by train one morning to do some shopping. She seems to have lost her footing when she got out of the train at the station in Helmond. She then had to be brought back here in a carriage. It’s fortunate that things are now not much worse than they are, given the form of transport, and that the setting went so well (although it’s bad enough in itself). But still — there’s a lot to be dealt with. Write soon if you can. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear friend Rappard, It’s hard to call it very cordial that you haven’t even dropped me a line in all this time. Assuming that you’ll also think more or less the same yourself, however, this subject isn’t under discussion right now. Something else is that my mother is doing much better than could have been expected at first. And the doctor now dares to give us an assurance that she’ll be better in about 3 months. I’ve occasionally thought about what we agreed, roughly that I was to have sent you a few watercolours this winter. But because I heard nothing whatsoever from you I didn’t feel at all enthusiastic about it, to put it frankly. So nothing came of it — although I made some. I’ve mostly been painting these last few weeks — the weavers — toiled away at it quite a bit. And in these recent mild days painted outside in the fields, a little peasant cemetery. Then 5 pen drawings of weavers.
   I haven’t got much more in the way of woodcuts this winter — even so, one very fine print by O’Kelly, Irish emigrants3 — and a cotton spinning mill by Emslie, and then the print from the Xmas issue of The Graphic, For those in peril upon the sea. Do you know the poems of Jules Breton? I re-read them recently6 at the same time as another little volume of French verse by François Coppée, Les humbles and Promenades et intérieurs. Coppée’s really very beautiful too. Character sketches of workers — the demi-monde, too, in which there’s a great deal of sentiment. A very great deal. Have you been working so hard on your Dominican monk, or what was the reason that you haven’t written? Regards. Ever yours, Vincent 
   P.S.: I’ve also got hold of a spinning wheel here.    My dear friend Rappard, Here are some of the poems by Coppée that I promised to send you. Tristement2 reminds me of a poplar avenue by Hippolyte Boulenger — the Vallée de Josaphat, I think. What an autumnal mood it conveys. I thought that you’d like them too. There’s much, much more in the little volume; I just took things from it here and there. Have painted a few studies outdoors these last few days, I’m sending you a croquis of one of them. My mother continues to do well — the fracture has set and the plaster is off. All the same, she’ll still have to keep the leg horizontal for another 6 weeks or so. Yesterday, though, we carried her into the living room on a sort of stretcher, and later on she can be taken out into the open air now and again in the same way. With these poems by Coppée I’m adding an Arabian fable that I found this week in a piece by Lesseps, Voyage dans le Soudan. I liked the idea, and I believe it can be thus. Viewed thus, men don’t play a very noble role — well, but that is in fact the case. It doesn’t apply in general, though, because does the candle burn for the sake of the moth? If one knew that — well then — it might well be worthwhile committing suicide that way. 
   If, though, the candle itself were to snigger at the burned wings — — — —. But however that may be, it struck me. And — I always believe that in the depths there are these things — that would rend our hearts if we knew them. There are moments when one is wholly disenchanted with people — one’s own self included, of course — yet — chiefly because one will perish soon enough, after all, it really isn’t worthwhile persisting in one’s displeasure, even if it were well-founded. And should our ideas about the worthlessness of humanity be unfounded, our mistake is all the worse for ourselves. In my view, the worst evil of all evils is self-righteousness, and eradicating it in oneself a never-ending weeding job. All the more difficult for us Dutchmen, because so often our upbringing itself must inevitably make us become self-righteous to a very high degree. But not to harp on about it. I say to you once more that my idea about the drawings and that I ask you, show them if you get the opportunity, is based on things that aren’t really my fault — I’m quite often reproached ‘that I don’t sell’. Quite often asked: why others do sell and I don’t. I reply that I do hope to sell in time, but believe that I can most directly influence this by working on steadily, and that at the moment any ‘working at it’ to sell my current work would yield little. Consequently that it’s a question that doesn’t really interest me one way or the other, my attention being on making progress. All the same, both because people sometimes reproach me about it, and because I’m sometimes hard-pressed by difficulties in getting by, I may not neglect anything that is even the slightest chance to sell something. But again, it goes without saying that I’m prepared for its not yielding anything immediately. For my part, though, it’s something that stimulates me to show my work to a few people, now that I’ve finally made a start on it (perhaps that’s very odd of me). Regards, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Sadly7 Obsessed by these words, widowhood and autumn, My reverie seeks no other to express This melancholy, vast and monotonous, That robs me of all hope and all desire to love. Ceaselessly it evokes a long, long avenue Of plane trees, immensely tall, half bare, In which a woman in deep mourning, veiled, Moves slowly forward on the pallid grass. Her long skirts leave behind a wake, Trailing and rustling in the fallen leaves; She follows with her gaze the passage of a cloud Before the wind, driving from the north, already cold. She thinks of him, now absent, who was wont to say: I love you! And under the wide low sky from which the light has gone, Sees that, with the last chrysanthemum, yesterday The last butterfly has also died. And so she walks across the faded grass, Weary of wishing, weary of submitting, And always in her path, the plane-tree leaves Fall with a sound as sad as sighs. — In vain — to chase away these gloomy images Do I call up my youth, and that splendid summer. I do not trust the sun, no more believe the roses, And go about, head lowered, like a haunted man. My heart’s so full of autumn and of widowhood That I forever dream, under a pure, clear sky — Of one in mourning — in a chill landscape, And the leaves falling at first winter’s wind. To a Second lieutenant8 You carry, my handsome officer, With perfect grace, Your sword with hilt of steel, But I think of our defeat. This pelisse of finest stuff Sets off your figure perfectly; You’re charming; but after all We lost the battle. We read your intrepidity In your black eyes under their slender brows. Nothing wrong with wearing fancy gloves — But, they took two provinces from us. At your age one’s always proud Of a little bit of braid; But — do you see — ’twas yesterday They maimed our motherland. Lieutenant, I do not know If of an evening, a finger to your brow, Holding book and compasses, You stay up late, beside the lamp. Are your men your children? Are you their leader and their father? I wish to believe that, and would fight off A doubt that fills me with despair. Stripes on your sleeve, on your way,  Is it of deliverance you think? — Young man, give me your hand, Let’s give a little shout — ‘Vive la France!’ Arabian tale9 A moth was in love with a candle. Ever drawn towards it, it would come close to it. But as soon as the tip of its wing received a slight blow it would retreat, throwing itself at the cruel one’s feet and filling the air with its cries and groans. In the meantime the candle burned down — before giving out its last burst of light, it said to its suitor: Moth — you have made a great deal of noise over a few blows to the tips of your wings, you have unjustly reproached me; I have loved you in silence; my flame is about to go out. I am dying — farewell — fly off to other loves. 
   The lost dog10 When we go home, at night, through empty city streets, And see upon the wet, green, greasy mud Long streaks of gaslight, more of them every day, Often a stray dog with matted coat, a dreadful, doleful sight, An old dog from hereabouts, which its master, penniless, Has thrown out with a kick — perhaps mourning it — Will stick its stubborn nose into your heels, And if you should turn back, give you a look, And what a look — long, fearful, all cajolery, A mistress’s, a poor man’s touching gaze, Yet hopeless, with that uncertain air belonging to A woman scorned and a poor man who feels his shame. And if you stop, he’ll stop with you, and Feebly wag his wet and drooping tail,  Timid, knowing his fate lies in your hands. He seems to say: ‘Come on — take me with you — please?’ We’re moved — and yet we don’t quite dare; We’re poor ourselves — and rabies is a fearful thing. And then — unkindly — making as if to raise Our stick — we tell the dog: ‘Go on, be off with you!’ And — all contrite — he goes to plead his cause elsewhere. Ill-omened meeting — and what times are these, These savage Prussians, what they have done to us, (or, failing Prussians, drunken sots)11 That the poorest folk now cast their dogs aside, And when, distracted from the public show of grief, we must yet Pity these animals — who turn upon us their imploring gaze. At the ambulance12 Disturbing the convent’s silence, With its urgent noise Arrives an ambulance. They’re bringing in a wounded soldier. Blood glistening on his army coat, He limps, shattered by a shell, Using his rifle as a crutch To climb down from the wagon. It’s an old man with great moustaches, Three stripes upon his sleeve, Who hates hypocrites and prudes And starts by letting out an oath. He makes improper overtures, His way of looking’s almost insulting, Bringing a blush, under their horned headdresses, To the cheeks of 18-year-old novices. If the Sister, thinking he’s asleep and she’s alone, Prays by his bed, Quickly he’ll fill his old clay pipe And whistle with an air of boredom. What’s it to him if constantly They watch and pray for him? He knows his leg is lost  And that they’re going to hack it off. He’s wild with rage — Leave him alone; We’re very patient here; And there’s an atmosphere  That consoles, and masters, too. The influence is slow — but sure, Of these obedient servants of their vows, Gentle when they dress his wound And gentle, talking of God. — So — feeling, in his own way, That subtle, pious charm, The veteran, to every prayer, Soon will say: Thy will be done! 
   The novice13 When all her pain, all her regrets had died, And she had lost her last deceiving hope, Resigned, she went to seek in convent walls The calm that’s prologue to eternal life. Rosary swinging at her flannel skirts, And pale — often would she come and walk Here in the garden, sheltered from the wind,  Where no flower bloomed, all cabbage-beds and overhanging vines. Yet one day, in that garden did she pluck  A flower whose scent exhaled a worldly memory, Which grew there despite submission’s vows. She breathed it in at length, then — as evening fell, In sanctity, her conscience now at rest, She died, the way an incense-burner gives up life. Evermore14 Divine hope that two together come to form And two together share, The hope to love long, love always — love More dearly every day; Desire eternal, touching and chimerical, That lovers sigh, When, blissful moment, searching each other out, Their lips exchange a mutual breath. That vain, illusory desire — that cheating hope, Whereof we never spoke; It pains me to see we are afraid of it, Though it be in our soul. And when to your questioning, I, your sweetheart Murmur a soft response, ’Tis the word: — Evermore! — that’s on my lips Without my uttering it. And though its dear echo sounds within your heart, Your silence is the same When on your breast, languorous unto death, I swear I love you. What signifies the past — what of time to come? For what is best of all — Is to believe that it should never end, That hour’s illusion. And when I tell you — evermore — do naught That might dispel that dream, And may your kiss on mine Press all the longer and more tenderly. 
   Desire in melancholy15 Everything lives — everything loves, and I, sad and alone,  Stand like a dead tree against the vernal sky I can no longer love, I who have lived but thirty years, And have my mistress lately quit without regrets.  I am like a sick man, his thoughts grown dull And wearying of his stale, familiar room, His sole amusement, stupid and mechanical, To count inside his head his carpet’s flowers. Sometimes I wish my end were near,  And all these recollections, once so sweet, I thrust away — as from the portrait of an ancestor Whose gaze disturbs us, we turn away our eye. Even of that old love, that drew so many tears, No trace remains in this, my jaded heart. No more than on the rose the butterfly That brushed against it leaves a trace. O, thou figure in my thoughts, veiled and dim,  Whom I may meet tomorrow, whom I know not yet, A courtesan, leaning at table ’mid the remnants of a meal, Or — a young woman, pensive, eyes downcast and pale. Oh — appear! — if yet this wretched heart, empty of desire, Its flame extinct, you can again ignite, Give me again the infinite within a woman’s glance And all of nature blooming in a kiss. Come! As sailors on a foundering ship Throw — to win an hour’s respite — a treasure to the deep — Come! — I promise you all — heart and soul, blood and flesh,  All — for but a moment’s faith — or yet of drunken rapture. Sorrow assuaged16 You whom I saw as like the blasted oak, I find you now a father, find you spouse; And yet to that brow that dreamed of death’s release, A pistol once was held. All that you cannot have forgotten quite; You knew how one suffers and despairs; You carried in your breast the viper vile  Of a great love betrayed, a great hope — crushed. Oblivion eluded you — you sought out  Tumults, orgy and its songs — fame and its jibes And the long roaring of the sea and of the wind — Who, then, unto your sorrow put a silent stop O Lonesome one — ’twas but the rhythmic beat Marked by the cradle of a little child. A wound reopened17 O, my heart, are you then so craven and so weak? And would you be like a convict, dragging his ball and chain,  Who, though released, yet hobbles still? Be silent — well you know the sentence she has passed on you. I will no longer suffer, and thus I order you: If I should feel you swell once more and writhe, May I, with a stifled sob, crush you, And no one shall know of it, and, to still my cries, They’d see me — for that ghastly minute, Clench my teeth — just like a soldier during amputation. The first one18 It’s not that she was so beautiful, But we were both twenty, And that day, as I recall, Was a spring morning. It’s not that she looked so serious, But here and now I swear That never have I dared do a more courageous thing Than when I told her that I loved her. It’s not that she had a tender heart,  But it was so delightful To talk to her, to listen to her speak, My eyes would fill with tears. It’s not that her soul was hard, But all the same, we parted. From then my sadness takes its date, And will continue, everlastingly. In the street — evening20 Nine o’clock. Drums sound the retreat, Flighty grisettes are quitting working streets After their daily stint is done. It’s like a kick delivered to a swarming hive. In waterproofs, with little leather bags, You see them fly, trotting from every side To families and secret love affairs. Skilled laundresses — stitchers of ankle-boots, Daughters of Montparnasse and Ménilmontant, Happy he who waits for you, if his heart still beats. 
    
 0   Regards. Yours truly, Vincent Alone3 Velvety, dusted with gold, the stubble fields Rimmed by fire, float within the gloom; Beyond the black roofs skimmed by its light  Sinks, radiant, high summer’s dazzling star. In a great burst it falls, pouring its treasure forth: And the blue zenith casts a wondrous light Upon the road, where, in the fragrant breeze,  With leaping, whirling step they sing a roundelay.  Lit by the flames and in the burning dust, The women dance, hand in joyful hand,  But seated apart, the fairest of them dreams; She sits alone... and bites her morbid lip, As one might see, pale, among a field of vetch,  The sensitive mimosa shrink and pine. Evening song4 When the cloud  Drifts Trails tattered wisps of gold And spreading all at once Its splendid rays The sun pours down its benison; Poor gleaners Haymakers A fiery nimbus Plays about your hair Caresses Your softly curling braids. The rose-pink ray Bathes Your fraying, ragged dress, Glides — blazes, Drowns Your noble beauty in its flame. Then austere The mystery Descends, slowly expands; At dusk The air gives off The wholesome scent of wheat. The clump of elms Immense Redden their mingled boughs And with its hard outline The farm Stands out against the softness of the corn. The fire burns lower now The dream Suffuses evening’s balm; And all grows hazy Full of smoke Like a great thurible. The meagre flock Bleats Its homeward way to rest And the toads Flute Their gentle, touching song. Then far away The church bell tolls Its single steady note And its winged Flight Rises and falls on every side. The note strikes Is stilled Purer than when in evening woods We hear the huntsman  Scarlet-clad Blow on his rousing horn. How much more Love I this place Than the high peaks, This plain so humble Yet so full Of God’s abounding love! 
   Now you get a little rebuke — which is — when I was with you this winter, you were against ‘enthusiasm’ — I mean, said something that Jaap Maris said, I don’t know what, about enthusiasm — which he, that is Jaap, didn’t exactly apply in his life, thank God — even though he may have said something of the sort relating to some special case or other — he having carried on painting in all circumstances. Then the birds simply shouldn’t sing and the painters not paint if they were supposed to think about whether they weren’t too passionate. Now read Les Cigales — and — I’ll simply say nothing more. 
   Dawn (To Corot)6 I took a narrow path, at dawn, among the wheat, Where droplets falling from its heavy-hanging ears Drench him who brushes past; And as I wandered, called back long-lost dreams. Ah! Who has not bemoaned a splintered bough, Like the grey willows when men cut them down, That make so soft a sound, quenching with their tears  The thirst of bindweed twined about their feet! And then I felt my heart, from which I banished words, Turn tender in the subtle, pale and changing light, Just like a sickly tree that’s watered by the rain. And now behold, bursting upon the silver sky The joyful lark, that sees, emerging From the misty east, the first pink fleck. 
   Autumn (To Jules Dupré)7 The river slowly flows. Beside the bank,  Its waters murmur round old alder stumps, Tinted blood-red; tall yellow poplars  Cast their golden leaves among the paler reeds. The light wind weaves its moving net — Bright silver wrinkles, leaving those dark spots In which the trees droop cones and canopies, Trembling as if shaken by a host of birds. From time to time, a thrush’s thin repeated cry, And plunging from an overhanging bough, A jewel sparkles in the clear blue air; A sharp call draws out its strident note; The kingfisher, speeding on burning wing, A furtive streak of emerald and fire. 
   Setting sun (To Emile Breton)8 Vaporous, ceaselessly shifting sea of mist, Where shrouded slopes, broad billows, undulate, Villages, like lost black isles, Emerge, their brown feet sunk in the foam. As all falls quiet, expands, floats, smokes, As only the slow cowbells sound, deep in the ravines, As scattered points of light, lantern-like, Flicker, the sky shimmers and lights up all as one. Our silent globe, under the crimson dome, Prays and dreams, dazzled by the glory Of the fruitful star, censed by the clouds. Encompassed by this awe, o’ercome by god-like sleep, A red orb set in a great aureole, Gravely, slowly, sets the sun. 
   Yvonne9 Oft would I watch, my elbows on the sill, The girls returning from the spring at noon. Yvonne would come in view, distinguished from afar By her proud bearing and tall shapeliness. And what a pleasing sight it was, by Jove! To see her, pitcher on her head, Her coif flying like a lovebird’s crest, And soft blue petticoat flutt’ring in the wind. And with what grace, letting her humble shawl Fall in brave folds that floated in the breeze,  Would she stretch out her arm to hold, russet Against her pale-skinned brow, her earthen amphora! How pure her features! Something sour Yet charming played about her untamed lip; She was indeed the daughter of the shore, Strong, as if drenched by the exhalations of the sea. In the streets, loud with coarse taunts and cries,  Where cringing, scrawny dogs pay court to one another, Among the litter swept from many a yard, In gutters, with their turquoise sky-reflecting pools, About this town, hugging its grey and chalky walls, I think I see her still — tall, one hand on her hip, Letting no single drop fall from her brimming urn — Pass gravely by, without a backward glance. Cicadas10 When in the ripened field the ears of corn are still, When under the sun’s blaze the wheat makes crackling sounds, And the poppy droops languidly Under the slight burden of its scarlet crown, And all the birds have ceased to sing; The lazy ringdoves, sleepy on the blackest branch, Deep in the woods’ heart, murmur no more, Far from the silent sun that sets the fields on fire. And meanwhile in the corn, the brave cicadas A chorus thousands strong, summer’s marching brass, Madly and with never a pause have chafed Their wings against their wild cymbals’ bronze. Vibrating, upright on the long wheat-ears, Virtuosi, doomed ere summer’s season ends, Heavenward raise their thrumming hymn That echoes down the darkness of the nights. But nothing now will still their tireless cries; Banished from the oats or from the wheat They’ll find a new home in the burnt-out bush That dies of thirst in parched and sandy wastes. On leafless shrubs and withered thistle-flowers That let their white and silky tresses fly away, You’ll see the insect, with its powerful head, Still drunkenly exulting as it sings. Until that moment when, spreading out its ragged wing, Frustrated, burning with an ever purer flame, Its bronze eye fixed upon the distant blue, It expires, singing, on the dried-out stem. 
   Evening (To Louis Cabat)11 A simple ditch, lost beneath the leaves And in an alder thicket almost hid away; A passing insect scribes a little wake, Traced lightly on the sleeping mirror’s face. Eventide, the hour when miracles are wrought, Transfiguration turns everything to gold, Offering a wondrous vision to enraptured eyes, The humble ditch gleams brighter than a hoard. The dazzling sky, filtered through the boughs, Has plunged a ray deep into the waters black; Falling on every side, white sparks Surround a crucible of pale and liquid gold. Mysterious, peaceful beyond words, on its banks we see The pallid flowers with their sleepy heads,  Reflected foliage, a dark and mingled mass, And purple trees that seem to grow straight down. Far off, lit from on high, patches of emerald Suggest the shapes of brightly coloured fields, And the sky, blazing with a hue so fiery,  And the low sun, flickering through the reeds. And in my swelling breast – when I compare The spot’s simplicity and its sublime aspect – A holy rapture steals upon my soul, And I glimpse something of the Maker’s work. ’Tis naught – and yet ’tis all. Creating nature, God spreads abroad all its superb effects; He feeds the fledgling and pours beauty forth – blessing supreme – with an unstinting hand. ’Tis naught – and yet ’tis all. Seeing it, I forget – Poor little ditch that thus affects me so – My heart’s distress, my dreams of Italy, And I feel better – and I bless my fate. 
   The two crosses12 Beside a road somewhere in Pontcroix we see, Open to the sky, brand new, a pretentious cross On which there gleams a Christ, daubed all in pink. A few steps farther on – distorted, painful to behold, Pitiful, discarded near a wall that’s overgrown with weeds, A grotesque thigh-bone showing through the shade, Its mutilated head hideously inclined, Forgot among the nettles and the tangled briars – The old Christ, faded, twisted out of shape. The eternal Sufferer, he who soothes our pain, His present state recalls the bitter agonies Of all those noble hearts cast into obloquy; And the leper, fleeing daylight’s curse, The very beggar turns away his glance; The poet loves him but the crowd that passes by Has eyes for none but him who  Spreads wide aloft his arms, haloed in gold. Though crucified, his setting must be fine; To him be incense, holy vows, and prayers. The other, on the pebbly ground, naught but a piece of stone. And yet what heart would not be moved! The wall was broken, and Christ filled up the rift! The drain beside the road exhales its foetid breath On his beloved feet, those the Magdalen bathed. Thou whose crime was but in spreading love, When, to punish thee, Pilate and Caiaphas one day Placed on thy head the crown of thorns, O Christ, whom with his child-like hands – His rude and clumsy chisel by his love refined – A peasant carved from this hard block,  Did’st thou believe oblivion Would dare to throw thee into a wall’s dark cleft, Or, final insult, that the disrespectful scrub Would mix upon thy brow that blesses and that bleeds The bramble’s prickle with the granite spine? 
 0  Twilight (To Charles Daubigny)13 The anemone and the buttercup Have closed their satin flowers; Lo, evening comes; twilight Reveals the garden in its ideal form. All is drowsy – the very breeze Is drunk with scents, And colours are rendered exquisite In evening’s rich and dusky tones. When nature rests, Weary of daylight’s brilliance, It opens up its soul, and then the rose, Sleeping in the shade, becomes more fragrant still. And our soul, too, awakens, Our senses are appeased; When empty noises reach the ear They harass us no more. God grows discreet, and casts a veil Over superfluous ornament; Things grow larger – there’s the evening star – Diamonds fill the sky. The pale and diffuse light Makes magical each solid form, Outlines appear, Traced with a thread of gold. Mystery drives away the commonplace, All hangs suspended on the odorous air, And the gleam of an apotheosis Glows from lovers’ brows. What coolness indescribable, Pearly-grey and amethyst, Falls from on high upon the sand, Beside the scorched and withered grass. A ray runs across the murky shade, Plunges, and expires within the depths, Fragmenting, sending up once more Its living heat. The flowers whisper quietly to themselves, Floating in air intangible; Show here and there a feathery tip of red, The final struggle of the waning fire. On bushes, emerald greens Have a subdued intensity. The farther depths are dim; warm vapours Float through a vast emptiness. Beyond, the tops of maple trees, In sky suffused with opal and with gold; Full of a gorgeous tenderness, The infinite trembles, palpitates. O, close your flower, buttercup, Lover of noontime’s brilliant light, So that you cannot see, at eventide, The day becoming one with night. On the plain14 For me the fields, for me the rows of corn, For me the hillsides shrouded all in mist, The reaper-women’s weather-beaten heads  At evening, gathered round their lighted fires! For me the white-hot furrow,  Where noonday scorches the cricket’s wing For me – when birds are singing In a sea of green – the poppies With their drooping heads, vermilion. For me – far from your idle, self-important hearts, – for me the vast and boundless plain When fire’s lascivious tongue licks round its rim, Making it writhe in a demented dance. 
 1  Return from the fields (To François Millet)15 ’Tis that uncertain hour in which the evening star, Still pale against the pale night sky, Appears, twinkles, slips behind a veil, Tiring the watcher’s searching gaze. ’Twixt wheat and vetch, With dusty thistles lined, The tawny path still can be descried Among the fertile fields. From high above, ineffable, Amethyst-coloured light caresses it And the artist, for want of other word, Can only call it purple. Across the flat or gently sloping mead,  Losing their furrows, finding them again, It winds among the grass, where sounds The cricket’s shrill and reedy song. By banks gilded by eventide it goes Under the clear air Through which is heard the church bell’s sonorous note, Tolling in silent village streets. The peasant twice browned  By the twilight and suntan, Forehead bathed in the pale light, Makes his way home, his labour done. Bearing on his shoulder scythe or spade, Slowly he goes, Moistening his dry chest With mist, and with the scent of wheat. Slowly he goes, at his unhurried pace, With calm and heavy tread; The west, like a furnace smouldering, Turns him a deep and fiery bronze. Beneath his cottage’s black roof, Where rises a faint blue strand of smoke, There glows a spot of red; The soup is singing on the fire. His partner’s strong and firm, The children thrive, Old age approaches – what is its sting, Set beside childhood’s gay springtime? Thus he plods from habit long ingrained, Thus will he plod until his dying day; Content if through his humble toil The wheat is heavy and the barley fair. My dear friend Rappard, I was pleased with your letter about the drawings. As far as the loom is concerned, that really is a study of the machine made from start to finish in the place itself and was difficult — because one had to sit so close that it was very tricky to take measurements. I drew the figure in after all1 — but I don’t want to say anything with it except: ‘when that black monster of begrimed oak with all its slats somehow shows up like this against the greyness in which it stands, then there, in the centre of it, sits a black ape or goblin or apparition, and clatters with those slats from early till late’. And indicated the spot by setting down a sort of a shape of a weaver with a few scratches and blotches at the place where I saw him. Consequently, I didn’t give the slightest thought to the proportions of arms or legs at the time. When my machine drawing had been finished fairly carefully, I found it so unbearable that I couldn’t hear it clatter that I let the apparition appear in it after all. Very well — and — say it’s only a machine drawing — just put it next to a design for a loom and — — — — — I tell you, mine will really be more HAUNTING. Otherwise it’s nothing but a machine drawing — otherwise, apart from a je ne sais quoi.    And — putting my study next to a drawing by a mechanical engineer — who had drawn a design for a loom — mine would more clearly express that the thing’s made of oak begrimed by sweaty hands, and would every now and then, when you looked at it (even if I absolutely did not draw him in, or even if I drew him out of proportion), every now and then you couldn’t help thinking of the workman, whereas absolutely no ideas of this kind would occur to you looking at the design for a loom by a mechanical engineer. A sort of sigh or lament must sometimes come out of all that clutter of the slats. I like to see your drawings of machines very much — why? — because when you draw only the flywheel, I for one also can’t help thinking about the boy who turns it and feel his presence, I don’t know how. And those who regard your machine drawings as designs for machines understand nothing about your art. Yet — for oneself — if one draws a machine like this — I agree with you that one should make it as mechanical as possible if one wants the study to be of any use. Meanwhile, I completely understand your idea that, were it to be a drawing — which I still hope to make if I can get hold of my model — then the black apparition in the background must become the centre, the starting-point, the heart, and the most felt, worked up — the rest 
   kept subordinate to it. Well, it pleases me that you like my little winter garden. This garden set me so to dreaming, and I’ve since made another of the same subject, also with a little black apparition, which yet again isn’t in it as an example of the structure of the human body worthy of imitating, but as a blotch. I’m sending you that one too, and a few others, 
  
sepia sketch,
in the marsh5 — 

  
pen drawing,
 Pollard birches6 — Avenue 
      of poplars7 — Behind 
      the 
      hedgerows8 
      — The kingfisher9 
      and Winter garden.


 I’m sending them to you on a little roll; be so good as to put them in the portfolio with the others, particularly when you send them back, so that they stay flat if possible. I’m enclosing a piece of grey paper with them — they’ll show up better if you put them on that. As to these drawings and art presentations. I don’t care about art presentations. But what I do care about is this — I work every day, of course — and not a week goes by without me having several studies like this one, say. I always count it among the possibilities that some day or another I’ll find an art lover who would like to take them off me — not one or two, but 50, say. I know of more than one painter who had to let his studies (which he would probably have kept himself if he could), his studies go like this, but on the other hand received some money to get by on for a while. 
   And if I ask you to show them to people you may meet it’s because, once again, it isn’t entirely impossible sometime that you might be able to provide me with such an art lover. If this doesn’t happen, well and good — but for me, on account of my life getting more difficult rather than easier, it’s a duty to seek opportunities, track down chances to place my work. And that’s why I ask you, show them, when it seems appropriate. If they take no notice, very well — I’m prepared for that, too, of course. For the time being I would very definitely not want to give a talk about my work alone. As far as the people who occupy themselves with drawings are concerned — one always has a CHANCE of finding feeling among the ordinary art-loving public — a bit of trust and faith still — only among the superficially initiated like dealers (without exception) one finds absolutely no feeling, faith or trust, but always the same old files of superficial judgements — generalities — conventional criticism. Old files on which in my view it would be a waste of time — and teeth — to blunt one’s teeth. So — will you just show them if ever you get the opportunity, but please don’t go to any trouble — don’t force it — but, once again, for my part I have to do it. If I didn’t have to, I’d most certainly much rather keep studies, at least, for myself, and I would not want to sell them. But — — — Well. Now — regards — I’m painting again these days. Yours truly, Vincent I sometimes think about not doing anything else except pen drawings and — painting You shouldn’t be surprised that some of my figures are so very different from those that I do from a model at certain times. I very seldom work from the imagination — I almost never practise that. But am starting to become so accustomed to sitting directly in front of reality that I’m keeping my personal sensibility free then, far more so than right at the very beginning — getting less dizzy — am sometimes more myself precisely when I’m sitting in front of reality. If I hit it off with a model so that it’s calm and quiet and I’m already familiar with it, if I draw that model repeatedly, then among the studies one will eventually come through that’s something different from an ordinary study, more true to type, that’s to say: more felt. Yet, that one’s made under the same conditions as more wooden, less felt studies that preceded it. This is a way of working like any other — just as understandable, to my mind. For instance, these little winter gardens — you say it yourself, they’re felt — very well, but that’s not a fluke, I drew them repeatedly before these and the feeling wasn’t in them. After that — after those iron-like ones — came these; so too the clumsy and awkward ones. How it comes about that I express something with them is: because the thing has already formed itself in my mind when I begin. The first ones are utterly unpalatable to other people. I say this so that you should know that if there’s something in it, this isn’t a fluke but in fact properly reasoned and sought. 
   It really delighted me that you’ve noticed that recently I’ve been working on and attaching importance to expressing the relationship of the values of the masses against one another quite a bit, and the way things stand out from one another in the dizzying confusion of every nook and cranny in life. Previously the light and shade in my studies was usually more haphazard, at any rate not carried through logically, so they were colder and flatter. Once I feel — know — a subject, then I usually make it in 3 or more variations, whether it’s a figure or a landscape, but — every time I always involve reality for each one. And I even do my best not to give any details THEN — because then the reverie goes out of it. If Tersteeg and my brother &c. then say: so what’s that, grass or cabbages? — I say: glad YOU can’t make it out. And yet they’re still true enough to nature so that, for instance, the honest natives of these parts recognize details that I’ve scarcely noticed — say, for instance: yes, that’s Miss Renesse’s14 hedge, and there are De Louw’s beanpoles. My dear friend Rappard, Thank you for your letter — which made me happy. I was pleased that you saw something in my drawings. I won’t go into generalities about technique, but I do foresee that, precisely when I become stronger in what I’ll call power of expression than I am at this moment, people will say, not less but in fact even more than now, that I have no technique. Consequently — I’m in complete agreement with you that I must say even more forcibly what I’m saying in my present work — and I’m toiling away to strengthen myself in this respect — but — that the general public will understand it better then — no. All the same, in my view that doesn’t alter the fact that the reasoning of the good man who asked about your work, ‘does he paint for money?’, is the reasoning of a moaner — since this intelligent creature counts it among the axioms that originality prevents one from earning money with one’s work. Passing this off as an axiom, because it can decidedly not be proved as a proposition is, as I said — the usual trick of moaners — and lazy little Jesuits. 
   Do you think that I don’t care about technique or am not searching for it? I do — but only to the extent that — I want to say what I have to say — and where I can’t do it yet, or not well enough, I work on it to improve myself. But I don’t give a damn whether my language squares with that of these orators — (you know you made the comparison — if someone had something useful, true — necessary to say, and said it in terms that were difficult to understand, what good would it be to either speaker or audience?). I want to stay with this point for a moment — precisely because I’ve often come across a rather curious historical phenomenon. Let it be clearly understood: that one must speak in the audience’s mother tongue if that audience only speaks one language — that goes without saying, and it would be absurd not to take it as read. But now the second part of the question. Given a man who has something to say and speaks in the language that his audience is also naturally familiar with. Then — the phenomenon that the speaker of truth has little oratorical chic will manifest itself time and time again — and does not appeal to the majority of his audience — indeed is branded a man ‘slow of speech’2 and despised as such. He may consider himself lucky if there is one, or a very few at most, who are edified by him, because these listeners weren’t concerned with oratorical tirades but precisely, effectively with — the truth, usefulness, necessity of the words, which enlightened, broadened them, made them freer or more intelligent. 
   And now the painters — is the purpose and non plus ultra of art those singular spots of colour — that waywardness in the drawing, that which is called distinction of technique? Certainly not. If one takes a Corot, a Daubigny, a Dupré, a Millet or an Israëls — fellows who are certainly the great forerunners — their work is beyond the paint, it stands apart from the chic fellows, just as an oratorical tirade (by, say, a Numa Roumestan)4 is something very different from a prayer or — a good poem. One must therefore work on technique in so far as one must say what one feels better, more accurately, more profoundly, but — with the less verbiage the better. But the rest — one needn’t occupy oneself with it. Why I say this is because I believe I’ve observed that you sometimes think things in your own work aren’t good, which to my mind are good. In my view, your technique is better than, say, Haverman’s — because already your brushstroke often has something singular, distinctive, reasoned and deliberate about it, which in Haverman is endless convention, always redolent of the studio, not of nature.  Those sketches of yours that I saw, for instance, the little weaver5 and the old women of Terschelling, appeal to me — they get to the heart of things. I get little but malaise and boredom from Haverman. I’m afraid that in the future, too — and I congratulate you on it — you will ALSO hear the same comments about technique, as well as about subject and everything, in fact, even when that brushstroke of yours, which already has so much character, gets even more. 
   There are however art lovers who do, after all, appreciate precisely those things that have been painted with emotion. Although we’re no longer in the days of Thoré and of Théophile Gautier — alas. Just think about whether it’s wise, particularly nowadays, to talk a lot about technique — you’ll say I’m doing that here myself — actually I do regret it. But for my part, I intend to tell people consistently that I can’t paint, even when I’ve mastered my brush much better than now. You understand? — especially then, when I really will have an individual manner, more finished and even more concise than now. I liked what Herkomer said when he opened his own art school — for a number of people who could already paint — he kindly asked his students if they would be so good as to not want to paint like him — but according to their own nature — I am concerned, he says, with setting originality free — not with winning disciples for Herkomer’s doctrine. Lions do not ape one another. Well, I’ve painted quite a lot these last few days, a seated girl winding shuttles for the weavers, and the figure of the weaver separately. I’m longing for you to see my painted studies sometime — not because I’m satisfied with them myself, but because I believe that you’ll be convinced by them that I really am exercising my hand and, when I say I care relatively little for technique, it’s not because I’m saving myself trouble or trying to avoid difficulties. Because that’s not my system. I’m also longing for you to get to know this corner of Brabant sometime — much more beautiful than the Breda side in my view. It’s delightful here at the moment.  There’s a village here — Son en Breugel, which is amazingly like Courrières, where the Bretons live — yet the figures over there are at least as beautiful. As one starts to appreciate the form more, one sometimes takes a dislike to — ‘the Dutch traditional costumes’, as they’re called on the photograph albums that they sell to foreigners.
   I’m sending you herewith a little booklet about Corot — which I think you’ll enjoy reading if you don’t know it — there are several accurate biographical details in it. I saw the exhibition at the time, for which this is the catalogue. What’s remarkable in it is that that man ripened and matured for so long. Just look at what he did at different times in his life. I’ve seen examples of his first actual work — itself the result of years of study — honest as the day is long, thoroughly sound — but how people must have despised it! Corot’s studies were a lesson to me when I saw them, and was already struck at the time by the difference from studies by many other landscape painters. If I didn’t see more technique in your little peasant cemetery14 than in Corot’s studies — I’d liken it to them. In sentiment it’s identical — an endeavour to express only the intimate and the essential. What I’m saying in this letter amounts to this — let’s try to get the hang of the secrets of technique so well that people are taken in and swear by all that’s holy that we have no technique. 
   Let the work be so skilful that it seems naive and doesn’t stink of our cleverness. I don’t believe that I have reached this desirable point yet, for I don’t even believe that you, who are further on than I am, are already there. I believe you’ll see more in this letter than nitpicking about words. I believe that the more one has to do with nature itself — the deeper one penetrates into it — the less attraction one sees in all these studio tricks, and yet, I do want to take them as they are and see them painting. I would really like to spend a lot of time in studios. Not in the books have I found it And from the ‘learned’ — oh, little learned is in De Génestet, as you know.
   One might say as a variant on this, Not in the studio have I found it 

And from the painters

 oh, little learned.


the connoisseurs


 Perhaps my inserting painters or connoisseurs as equals shocks you. But changing the subject — it’s devilishly difficult to feel nothing, not to be affected by what such moaners as ‘does he paint for money’ say. One hears that rot day in and day out, and later one gets angry with oneself for having taken any notice of it. That’s how it is with me — and I think that it must occasionally be the same with you. One doesn’t give a damn about it, but all the same it gets on one’s nerves — like when one hears someone singing off-key or is pursued by a barrel-organ with a grudge against you. Don’t you think that’s true about the barrel-organ, and also that it seems to pick on you specifically? For wherever one goes, it’s the same old tune everywhere. 
   Oh, as to me — I’m going to do what I tell you — when people say this and that to me — I’m going to finish their sentences before they do — in the same way as, when I know someone is in the habit of offering me a finger instead of a hand (I pulled it off yesterday with a venerable colleague of my father’s), I for my part also have one finger ready and, keeping a straight face, carefully touch his with it when shaking hands — in a way that the man can’t say anything about it but realizes I’m bloody well getting my own back on him. Well, I’ve recently made somebody very angry with something of the sort — does one lose anything by it? No, for in truth these people are a hindrance, and the fact that I write to you about some expressions you use is to ask you: are you sure that those who are praising technique to the skies are in good faith? I just ask it precisely because I know that your aim is to avoid studio chic. My dear friend Rappard, My parents join me in asking you whether you would care — to come here one of these days. As soon as you like. My mother is now so much better that she sits in an easy chair in the living room — goes out in a bath chair, is starting to walk &c. &c. So it has turned out better than one dared to count on at the outset. Outdoors — the trees are in blossom — and it’s precisely the time when it isn’t yet too hot for long trips. Sent you another 3 pen drawings the other day, Ditch1 — Pine trees in the fen2 — Thatched roofs3 — whose subjects I thought you would like. As far as the execution is concerned, of course I would wish right heartily that the direction of the pen strokes had followed the forms more expressively, and the forces that establish the tone of the masses also expressed their shape better. 
   I think you’ll grant me that the way things fit together — the shape of them — hasn’t been systematically or deliberately neglected — but I had to make a rough stab at it in order somehow to render the effect of light and shade — nature’s mood at that moment — the overall aspect — in a relatively short time. For all three are specific moments that one can see these days. I hope that you’ll come. Of course you’ll bring your tools with you, and the more of your work you bring the better — I’d like to see the sketches of the old women of Terschelling4 and the little weaver5 again. Regards — from my parents too. Yours truly, Vincent If you do come, I think it would be a good opportunity to bring back the drawings that are now with you. We can then resume with a number of new ones if you like. It’s always good to let the work circulate a bit — and if people don’t take it, it doesn’t matter — show it again anyway. 
   If you’ve now shown these to a few people perhaps, and they’ve rejected them or laughed at them or said what they want about them — if they constantly go on seeing more of them, they’ll change — not all — but some. I’m really eager for you to see my painted studies again. My dear friend Rappard, I heartily congratulate you on the silver medal you got in London. It’s a satisfaction to me that I said what I said about that painting at the time. And to have repeated it yet again recently, specifically in our conversation on that Friday when I said to you, ‘I found something in the colour of that painting, the Woman spinning, that seems to me better and more solid than what I’ve seen you paint here’. All the same, the little weaver2 is an exception to this, as I also stipulated then. Starting a painting in a low register and then seeking to raise it from low upward, I found that system in your woman spinning at the time — although it was a very original way of doing things. On that Friday I reminded you of your own words about that painting in one of your letters, ‘there are surprising forces in it’. And I sometimes missed those in your later work. I look back on your visit with great pleasure, and I don’t doubt that the more you come here the more the scenery will attract you. 
   Since you left I’ve been working on a Water mill — the one I asked about in that little inn at the station, where we sat talking with that man whom I told you seemed to suffer from a chronic shortage of small change in his pocket. It’s the same sort of thing as the two other water mills that we visited together, but with two red roofs, and which one views square on from the front — with poplars around it. Will be magnificent in the autumn. Glad you sent off the books. Perhaps my brother Theo will come briefly at Whitsun, although not for longer and only if he sees a chance of getting some time off5 — he’ll be pleased, as we all are, that you’ve received an award. Adieu — more soon, believe me, with a handshake Yours truly, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I haven’t written to you for a long time. First I waited for your reply to my last letter, but assumed it didn’t come because you’d probably gone to Drenthe. Then I got very busy so that I didn’t get round to writing these last few weeks. However, do try to find a moment now to let me know a little of what you’ve been doing, and above all to tell me how it’s going with your big painting of the fish market. I’ll now continue about myself. This summer I saw a house in Eindhoven that belongs to a former goldsmith3 who is now rich, and has already amassed and sold a collection of antiques several times. This man paints a bit himself, and has a room in his house (which is full yet again of beautiful and ugly antiques) that he wants to paint himself. He had a plan for it. When I went there, there were 6 panels, each 1 1/2  metres long by 60 cm high, which he still had to fill with something and on which he was planning to make, among other things, a Last Supper after a preliminary drawing that was in something like a modern Gothic style. 
   Then I said to him that in my view — since it’s a dining room — it would do considerably more to whet the appetites of those who would have to sit at table there if scenes from the peasant life of the region were to be painted on the walls rather than mystical last suppers. The good fellow didn’t contradict me. And after a visit to the studio, I made provisional scratches for him of 6 motifs from peasant life, Sower, Ploughman, Wheat harvest, Planting potatoes, Shepherd, Winter with ox-cart. And they’re what I’m doing now. But in such a way that I’m making these 6 canvases for myself, but that I’m making them, in terms of format, for instance, with a view to his room anyway, and he’s paying me my expenses for models and paint, while the canvases remain my property, however, and I get them back when he’s copied them. This lets me make things that would be rather too expensive for me if I were faced with the whole cost. And it’s a job I’m enjoying very much and working hard on. I’ll have to go to quite a bit of trouble, though, to point out things to him when he’s copying. 
   I’ve already got painted sketches in the finished size of something like 1 1/2 metres by 60 cm of Ploughman10 and Sower11 and Shepherd. Smaller ones of Wheat harvest13 and Ox-cart in winter. So you can imagine that I’m not exactly sitting on my hands these days. Did I already tell you that I’ve also made a woman spinning and another weaver? I’ve been given a magnificent book, J.F. Millet by Sensier, and I myself bought a book by Blanc, Grammaire des arts du dessin, because of a passage from it quoted in Artistes de mon temps. This book deals with something like the same questions as the little book by Vosmaer, but for my part I would much rather read Blanc. You can read Blanc’s book and the Millet too, if you like. Regards — from my parents too — and believe me Yours truly, Vincent 21 Sept. My dear friend Rappard, With many thanks for letting me read them, I’m today returning the book by Blanc and the one by Fromentin. As I said, as a consequence of reading Artistes de mon temps, I sent for the Grammaire des arts du dessin by the same writer, and you can read it if you want to. Last week I happened to go to Utrecht for the day with some other people from the village. I did call on you, but I couldn’t go back because I had to leave again the same day. I found no one home, and I was sorry because it meant that I couldn’t see any of your work at all — I really would have liked to see your large painting of the fish market. And they couldn’t even tell me where you were, which is why I assume you’re still in Drenthe. And at the same time I wanted to talk about your visit to us, whether or not you feel like it. I already wrote to you, but no reply to two letters. Regards, Yours truly, Vincent I’ve worked with great pleasure on the 6 canvases I wrote to you about, and all 6 of them are now done as painted sketches and are already with my art lover, after which, once he’s copied them, they remain my property and I’ll finish them off. The subjects are: 

Planting potatoes8


Ox-plough9


Wheat harvest10


Sower11


Shepherd, storm effect12


Wood gatherers, snow effect13


 I was somewhat constrained because I had to keep to specific dimensions, and also because my art lover preferred compositions with 5 or 6 figures, say, whereas I would rather have had 2 or 3. But anyway, I still worked on them with a great deal of pleasure, and will take them even further. My dear friend Rappard, I just wrote to you today, and your letter from Terschelling crossed mine. I’m very pleased that you’ll be bringing quite a lot back from your trip; I gather from what you say about your studies that you’re indeed bringing very useful things. I’m still sorry that I didn’t see that painting of the fish market, the initial composition at least. What I wrote about it can, as you say, be wrong in so far as what I said — ‘if you keep the division essentially as it is, you would in my view have to solve it by means of a division of light and shade, a choice of chiaroscuro’3 — can be something altogether different, can be diametrically opposed to your intentions if, say, you were to want to make a grey painting. All the same — your croquis will be accurate and in accordance with the painting as regards the canvas area that your figures occupy as against the area of canvas covered by houses, street, sky. And then it struck me immediately that the figures will be overwhelmed by the rest, and it will become too much of a battle between figures and surroundings. Anyway, I’m damned sorry I didn’t see the initial composition itself. 
   By the way, it’s not — as you suppose — that I’ve lost sight of the fact that it’s you, not me, who’s making that painting. I base my reasoning on what you won’t contradict, that you are making a PAINTING. And a painting — whoever it’s by — by you just as well as by anyone else — ought to say just one thing and that quite clearly. Talking of Van der Weele, I remember saying to him about his painting that he got the medal for in Amsterdam5 — contrary to what other people said — that I really appreciated how, with all the different things in it, he had managed to keep unity, STYLE in it so well, and that it really was a painting, that is, something very different from a realistic study from nature. Anyway — after all — I didn’t see your initial composition except in the little scratch, and I don’t in the least doubt that there’ll be very creditable things in it. But I continue to say what I said all the same, and point out again, for instance, that I fear your foreground can’t carry all the things that are in it, and 
   will either become paint or else irresolute and woolly — what they call weak. I had just the same thing this summer with a weaver’s interior that I couldn’t take any further because the whole thing came too far forward, that the painting began with what should have been the background — the foreground, the solid basis, was missing. I reproached myself with exactly the same as I said to you.  It’s something that very often happens to pretty well every painter, and can sometimes only be remedied by transporting the thing to a larger canvas. Tell me, do  you know ordered off by Frank Holl from the London News? I brought it with me from Utrecht, at the same time as a shepherd by Thompson. Regards. I hope you’ll come in October — if you can, write beforehand and tell me exactly when. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, A very brief line in haste. My parents asked me yesterday whether I knew anything more about your visit. I said I knew in general that in all likelihood you’d be coming in October, but no further indication of the date than that. Between ourselves, I tell you that although you’re equally welcome at any time and can be expected at any time — I think that it would suit them at home better in October than in November, say, because I believe that they’re expecting other guests later, for which reason I may perhaps go somewhere else myself for a while in November. You’ll see from what I say here that it isn’t just me but also my parents in particular who are counting on you, and it would be a disappointment to us if your visit were to fall through. To the extent that I’d actually regret having written to you like this if it even shortened your visit.  The fact that my parents mentioned it was more a hint to me that certain people who would, I imagine, rather not meet me are coming in November, a hint, I repeat, to me that they wouldn’t take it amiss if I weren’t here in November, for instance, and possibly half of December. But both they and I are definitely expecting you, and would be disappointed if you didn’t come. But because I’ve already said that I was intending to go on a trip somewhere else in November, precisely with a view to not getting in anyone’s way, my parents are counting on it. So do come in October, and for as long as possible. As you already said in your last letter anyway. But I have to be away during November. It’s very beautiful here. Just don’t put it off for too long. Regards — with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent  It’s actually almighty inconvenient for me not to be able to be here in November, and I imagine I’ll stay in the vicinity anyway, somewhere else in Brabant. But since I think that they’re expecting guests then, whose custom it is to come at the beginning of the winter until Christmas time, say, I immediately said something myself about a proposed trip that actually wouldn’t have been my intention at all if there’d been no reason for it. Something else — when you come, come via Eindhoven, writing to tell me which train — then I’ll meet you at Eindhoven station. Then we’ll go together to the man I’m making the decoration for — the 6 canvases I already wrote to you about. This art lover is now busy copying them, and all 6 of them are with him. He’s a very nice fellow, a goldsmith by profession, and a chaser of brass and metal for church ornaments &c. 
   I think that if you leave Utrecht early in the morning you’ll be in Eindhoven shortly before or after 12. That would be the very best time to go there together, and go to Nuenen by train or on foot in the early evening. Dear Sir, I looked at your new still lifes with pleasure, particularly the one with a Cologne pot and jar of gherkins. And those two previous ones have also been improved by change to the background. However — nonetheless, in general, in these ones too, the colour in the shaded passages is again still not lively enough, in my view. I wanted to drop you a line to tell you that I’ll try to arrange matters so that I can come and paint with you for 3 days in a row — if you approve. That means we can really tackle this question. Because otherwise I fear that you wouldn’t be able to help getting the same results again every time. So I say, let’s devote 3 days or so to it, because the question of chiaroscuro and colour and deep tone in the shadow is an eternally difficult question. And whether or not a study is painted better or less well — its artistic value — depends to a very considerable extent on the treatment of the shaded passages. I’ll tell you what I feel when looking at your studies as they are now. 
   I’ve soon seen enough, and I’d wish that the shaded passages in particular drew my eye for longer. Were more mysterious. This shouldn’t surprise you — and you mustn’t take it amiss of me if I repeatedly speak of it — between ourselves. In order to get the chiaroscuro right, one must not only paint a lot but also really see a great deal being painted, and know some things about theory, about light and colour. I’m sure that once we’ve really painted together again you’ll see for yourself that at the moment you’re still overlooking things which, once you learn to see them, will mean that painting will interest you much more even. In short — there will be even more soul in it. Well, what I regret about this is that I’m so tied to my models here — I can’t get away as easily as I could in the autumn. In the winter I can get people to pose whom I can’t get when they have work out in the fields, or only with more difficulty. 
   Anyway, I’m working with almighty pleasure these days, for I would much rather paint figures than anything else. Then — the heads of these women here with the white caps — it’s difficult — but it’s so eternally beautiful. It’s precisely the chiaroscuro — the white and the part of the face in shadow, that has such a fine tone. I don’t know exactly when I’ll be able to get away for three days or so, but I’ll send you a postcard as soon as I can. I’m coming over for a while on Sunday anyway, and would like to take a metre of that canvas from Baijens4 with me, since my canvas is used up. I do foresee, though, that the better you do and the more you progress with your painting, the less pleasure you may experience from it because of certain Eindhoven folk. But at the same time it seems to me that the pleasure of being able to make something amply outweighs certain spiteful criticism. Anyway, the more one paints, the less time and inclination one has to listen to it. 
   Next Sunday I hope to bring you a portfolio of wood engravings in which you’ll find things that will interest you.  Between ourselves — that still life which you framed makes an impression on me of being less correct in the drawing than most of the others. In this respect, that I dare suppose that you neglected sufficiently to compare the proportion of the width of the group as a whole with the height, and consequently the relationship between the objects leaves something to be desired. Measuring, that’s what such a tremendous amount depends on, and if you really pay attention to it at the outset, you’ll save a lot of time later, when there will be the more difficult subjects — such as a head — to make. I write this to you to assure you, at the start of 85, that it’s not out of indifference that I haven’t come so much recently, but that on the contrary I consider that if you keep working like this for the whole of the year 85, you’ll make more progress in one year than many others in 3 years. So with my best wishes for 85 — yours respectfully Your servant Vincent     Dear Sir, I’m not sure whether I can come and paint next Saturday. Because I’m making a couple of studies here — of the potato planting1 — on which I may possibly have to continue to work on the day in question. But if not Saturday, I’ll come anyway — unless I hear from you to the contrary — on Monday. Yours truly, Vincent     Dear Sir, Here are a few more books; you’ll certainly like the one by Rovers with the little etching by Israëls, and the drawings by Menzel too. I’m very glad that you’ve been to Antwerp and have seen some good paintings there. I hope that it will work out so that we’ll be able to go there together this summer, and then at the same time go and see the modern paintings in Brussels, which in my view are superb. I think I’ll be in a position to do it in the course of the summer. For my part, I particularly need to see the work of Degroux, Meunier and a few other Belgians again. I’m enclosing with the books some woodcuts that I know you’ve already seen at my place, but it can do no harm for you to look at them again at leisure in your own home. I have duplicates of 4, namely Renouard, Menzel, Heilbuth and Dagnan. They’re at the front of the portfolio and you can keep them. I respectfully remain, Your servant Vincent My dear friend Rappard I just received your letter — to my surprise. You hereby get it back. Sincerely, Vincent Dear Sir, I’ve finished two paintings — if you’d like to come and look at them with Van de Wakker1 on Sunday — very well. Since I’ll also have finished others before long — if you want to wait — also very well. Wanted to tell you, though, as agreed — I’m busy and can’t easily get away, as you observe. If you do come either Sunday or later — would you just tell Van der Harten, who wants to come and see my birds’ nests. Sincerely, with a handshake, Yours truly, Vincent When you’re coming, please advise on a postcard. My dear friend Rappard, All that has passed means that when I come to write to you it’s more in order to be clear than because I do it for my pleasure. As to my having returned your last letter to you forthwith, there were two reasons for it, each in its own right, to my mind, providing a motive. Firstly — suppose that your comments on the lithograph I sent you1 were correct, suppose I had nothing to say against them — even then, you wouldn’t have been justified in condemning my work in such an insulting manner, or rather in ignoring it as you did. And secondly — whereas you have had more friendship than you have given, not just from me but from my family too, you certainly cannot claim that on an occasion such as my father’s death we were obliged to send something other than a printed notice. Particularly not me, since before that time you hadn’t replied to a letter from me. Particularly not me, since on the occasion of my father’s death you did send an expression of sympathy in a letter addressed to my mother — but such a one that when it arrived there was comment at home about what reason there might be for not writing to me then — which I didn’t want, however, nor do I.
   You know — I haven’t been on the best of terms with them at home for years. In the first few days after my father died, I had to correspond with the immediate family. But otherwise, as soon as family arrived, I withdrew from it all completely. And regarding any omissions, not me but the family. And I have to tell you that in so far as it goes, you’re an exception, that I asked them at home if they’d sent you word and it appeared that it had been forgotten. Much more than enough about that. The reason I’m writing to you again is in no way to respond to your comment in that regard. Nor to repeat what I said about your remarks about painting. You’ve been able to re-read your own letter. If you still believe that was justified, if you still really think that ‘if you put your mind to it, you can deuced well express yourself correctly’ — well — then it’s best simply to leave you to your delusions. To get to the point — the reason why I’m writing to you is simply that — although it was you who insulted me in the first place, not I you — I’ve known you too long for me to consider this a reason 
   to break off all acquaintance. What I have to say to you is as a painter to a painter and — so long as you and I paint — it will remain so — whether we know each other, whether we don’t. There was mention of Millet.  Very well — I’ll answer you, my dear friend. You wrote, ‘you dare to invoke Millet and Breton’. My reply to that is that I seriously invite you to consider — simply not to fight with me. For my part — I go my own way — you see — but I don’t seek a quarrel with anyone — not with you now either. I’d also let you say anything that you wanted — if you had any more such expressions — and it would just be like water off a duck’s back. So much for the present, though. That I don’t care about the form of the figure, which you’ve said before — it’s beneath me to take any notice of it and — old chap — it’s beneath you to say something so unfounded. You’ve known me for years now — have you ever seen me do anything other than work from the model and resign myself to the sometimes great expense of it, even though I’m poor enough as it is?
   What you didn’t write in your last, but did repeatedly and ad nauseam in previous letters, and was the reason for the letter to which you didn’t reply, is about ‘technique’. What I replied to you then and reply once more is — the conventional meaning that people increasingly give to the word technique, and the actual meaning, knowledge. Well then. Meissonier himself says, ‘the knowledge — nobody has it’.  Well, ‘the knowledge’ isn’t the same as ‘knowledge’, that first of all, and that you won’t deny. But even that still isn’t it. Take Haverman, for instance; people — you too — say of him that he has so much technique. But not only Haverman, how many others — have something that’s equivalent to the sort of knowledge that H. has of art — among the French painters — Jacquet, say, and he’s better. My assertion is simply this — that drawing a figure academically correctly — that an even, reasoned brushstroke have little — at least less than is generally thought — to do with the needs — the urgent needs — of the present day in the field of painting. If, instead of saying H. has a lot of ‘technique’, you were to say H. has a lot of ‘craftsmanship’, I would have agreed with you for once. You will perhaps understand what I mean when I say that when Haverman sits in front of the head of a beautiful girl/woman, he’ll make it more beautiful than almost anyone, but put him in front of a peasant — and — he won’t even make a start on it. His art — as far as I know — proves chiefly applicable to subjects which aren’t the ones that are needed — is above all applicable to subjects that are pretty much completely and utterly opposite to Millet or Lhermitte — and sooner run parallel to Cabanel — who for all his what I call — craftsmanship — has said little that lasted — or contributed to progress. And — this I beg of you — don’t confuse this with the way a Millet or Lhermitte paints. What I said and still say — the word — technique — is all too often used in a conventional sense — and — it’s all too often not used in good faith. People praise the technique of all those Italians and Spaniards, and they’re fellows who are more conventional, have more sheer routine — than anyone else. And with such as Haverman, I fear, ‘craftsmanship’ so soon becomes — ‘routine’. And then — what’s it worth then?
   What I want to ask now — what’s the real reason that you’ve broken with me —? The reason I’m writing to you again is just out of love for Millet, for Breton and for everyone who paints the peasants and the people, among whom I count you. I don’t say it because I got a lot from you as a friend – my dear friend – because — I got precious little from you — and don’t take it amiss of me for saying this to you straight out for the first and last time — I know of no drier friendship than yours. But — firstly that’s not why I’m doing it — secondly, that might have improved too — but having created my own opportunities to find models &c., I’m not so petty as to keep it quiet. On the contrary — were any painter, no matter who, to come to this district, I would be glad both to invite him home and to show him the way. Precisely because it’s not always easy to find models who are willing to pose — and having a pied-à-terre somewhere isn’t a matter of indifference to everyone. And this is why I say to you that, if you want to paint here, you mustn’t be embarrassed because we had a disagreement. And — although I’m living on my own in my studio now — you can even stay too. 
   It may be, though, that — superciliously — you’ll say that this is of no consequence to you. Well, that’s all right. I’m so accustomed to insults that they really are so like water off a duck’s back — that — someone like you — probably finds it hard to understand just how cold a letter like yours, say, leaves me. And being indifferent to it — I have no more resentment than a post. But I do have — enough clarity and serenity to reply as I do now. If you want to break with me — very well. If you want to go on painting here — you don’t have to take any notice of this little bit of bickering in our correspondence. What you did the last time you were here4 — had and has my full sympathy — and — my dear friend Rappard — it’s because you worked so damned well that last time, and I think to myself that you might perhaps want things here to remain as they were, that I’m writing to you.
   Make up your own mind — I say frankly — from one point of view — in spite of all my appreciation of your painting — I have some concerns about whether you’ll be able to keep it up like this later — I sometimes fear that, because of the influences to which you cannot but be exposed given your social position and standing, you may not remain as good in the long run as you are at the moment — just as a painter in your painting — I don’t concern myself with the rest. So I say to you, as a painter to a painter, that if you want to look for paintings here, it will stay just the same as before. You can come here and, although I live on my own, stay just the same as before. You see — I thought that perhaps you had got and could get something out of it, and I just wanted to tell you this. If you can get on as well elsewhere — well then — I’ll have no reason to grieve about it, and then, adieu.
   You’ve told me nothing about your work, so I likewise say nothing about mine. Believe me — don’t argue with me about Millet — Millet is someone I won’t argue about, although I don’t refuse to talk about him. Regards. Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I just received your letter — it’s drier and more long-winded than ever. However, when you say in it, ‘I want to answer your missive at once so as not to encourage you in the idea that there’s any question of a breach, at least not on my part,’1 I need to repeat yet again that you must know once and for all that in the house where I have my studio there’s a spare room at your disposal, as it is for any painter whatsoever who wants to come and make studies here. That’s clear, isn’t it, and it’s up to you whether or not you make use of it. And for my part I’d advise you and Wenckebach, whom I’ll probably see tomorrow, just to come now and then, since there are beautiful things enough here. If you have a mind to appreciate this, very well. If not, that’s all right too. If you do come, though — each goes his own way.
   As far as the lithograph3 is concerned, here’s my explanation — I made it — entirely from memory and in 1 day when, going crazy searching for a composition, working with a very different process, I was looking for a new idea for putting it together. Besides, this is a trial and nothing more, biting it out on the stone later. Originally — although faults in an arm or nose that caused you to fly off the handle obviously remain unchanged — the chiaroscuro was much better and it also is in the later composition that I painted. And as to that, there are certainly faults in it too, but also things which lead me not to regret having painted it. I can’t tell you that your letter of today is at all useful or necessary to me. Be assured, though, that your saying that your faith in me was shaken and so forth is a matter of relative indifference to me. I let people (you and certain others are no exception) say, think of me, act towards me precisely — as they wish — that’s their business — I’m not obliged to listen to that eternal nagging. My parents, teachers, Messrs Goupil & Co., besides all sorts of friends and acquaintances, have said so many unpleasant things to me for my own good, with the best intentions, that in the end the burden got too heavy for me. Since I’ve been letting them get on with it without worrying about it, I haven’t got worse, my dear friend — I believe I know this for sure.
   In reply, though, this — it’s true that you do good work, but that doesn’t mean to say that you’re always in the right, my dear friend, that there are no other manners and ways but yours to achieve something good and sound. I’d very much like to talk to you about many things — although you must definitely not take this to mean that I’m asking for advice — but there’s less and less point in it. Speaking of self-knowledge — who has it? Here again ‘the knowledge — no one has it’. Some knowledge — concerning oneself, concerning one’s own bad or good tendencies, everyone — and I begin with myself — is certainly in the utmost need of it. But — don’t think that you never deceive yourself for lack of it – don’t think that you never hurt others cruelly and undeservedly with superficial judgements. I know — everyone does that — and people have to manage to get on together all the same. But you — to speak of self-knowledge — no, my dear friend — it distresses me that you broach this subject, because I’m afraid that this is where your very weakest side is, at least as a human being. But anyway — I’ll try to tell you clearly what I think about when I think about you.
   And regarding your work — look — I find the present things excellent — but look, here’s a thought just as it is in my mind — without concealing any part of it — I’ve known you for a long time now. There was a time — just before and just after your illness7 — when you were much less dry as a person than usual — more rounded, milder, broader, more generous — more sincere and more open. Now you speak to me and you behave towards me just like a former certain horribly priggish Rappard at a certain academy. I’m sorry to have that acquaintance back, and I’m even sorrier to have lost you as a friend, as you were in that exceptional period when I found you changed and improved. Since I observed this — now I think — and his work?? Will that also be broader, more rounded, nobler only for a short while?? Do you know the answer to this? It’s taken me less than half a page of writing to express this idea, but you can see from it that I sometimes fear that your work, too, will perhaps lose its nobler quality. I’m telling you this idea, it seems to me, clearly and simply. Whatever my faults may be — I have genuine good will in my endeavours as a painter, I also have genuine good will to be good to other people — I have too much heart to be as frivolous in my work as you always accuse me of being. I don’t have to take your letter to heart, and I won’t. And what you say about my needing somebody to get things into my head — maybe — but at the same time it could be that I myself am the person to get things into my own head — and can well do without other people — at least if they nag as much as you do. Regards — but your letter as a whole wasn’t fair, although there are details in it that have a certain accuracy. Vincent You tell me nothing about your work, I likewise tell you nothing about mine.
   Look here — to make short work of it. Do you believe that you’ve behaved fairly towards me? The fact that you say that you’ve done it for I don’t know what far-fetched scruples towards my parents, because you doubted me — but old chap, it’s just too boring, just too nonsensical. In short, YOU HAVE been unfair and — you are that on more than one occasion. Now I’m someone who has enough understanding of human nature, when someone of your position and standing does something like that, to observe it with a smile and — forget it. Do you want to persist, though? Carry on with this sort of priggishness? Oh — then you have my warning — an unfair person isn’t like Millet — and see my explanation about certain changes in you, which makes clear to you what I think as a whole about my perception of you.
   I’ll speak to Wenckebach tomorrow — I’ll tell him — without details — that I’m sorry you haven’t been here for a long while — and would like to see both you and W. himself here from time to time. So it’s up to you to make it up properly and magnanimously. And write about it further briefly and practically. Just between ourselves, I tell you that I don’t disagree with you that your work is noble (perhaps as a reaction from a nobler time than usual in your life as a human being), but be generous, broad and noble as a human being, too, if you want to be like Millet — and otherwise? Don’t ask me — or if you want to ask — what one is as a human being affects what one is as a painter. The little difference between us — I count as nothing — but — I wouldn’t want you to repeat something like that. And I don’t say it for myself alone — if you have other friends, be simpler and better. Think about Corot as far as character is concerned — and, as far as I’ve been able to make out, those French fellows — Millet, Dupré, Corot, Daubigny, tend to have that in common with one another. My dear friend Rappard, I spoke to Wenckebach today — and since you’d also had a word with him on the subject and he seemed to know something about the matter, I talked about it — although not in detail. Only as much as that I would be happy to regard it as a misunderstanding, but that I won’t allow your reproaches about my work. I will — with great pleasure — admit that I often — as is the case with most people — very often, if you will — do a thing wrong before I get it better. Very well. Details of your comments are very accurate; as a whole, no. In fact, W. thought that you would take them back. I’ve just shown him that if my figures have changed it’s precisely to gain more form and fullness, and that where I used to put a firm line, this sometimes actually meant that the figure stayed flat — which I’m coming to detest more and more. Now perhaps it’s a very good thing that it happened like this, though — for you won’t so easily undergo what you called ‘the shaking of your faith’ a second time.
   I’ve had the same sort of unpleasantness for a whole series of years with a whole series of people. When I sometimes protested that I didn’t deserve it, it just got worse and worse, and people didn’t want to hear a word about it — my parents and the whole family, Tersteeg and with him many people I knew then, when I was with Goupil, went so far in their condemnation of everything I did that in the last few years, instead of wasting more time trying to persuade them, in my turn I, who have no time to waste, simply turned my back on them as well. And let people say, think, do anything they like without taking any notice of it at all. This unpleasantness with you is not an isolated instance, even though you may think so. You’ve allowed yourself to be carried away by the general consensus. If you now feel a little of this yourself and just think it over, then, I repeat — it could be a very good thing that we’ve quarrelled.
   I’ll stick to my guns a bit, though, because I don’t want the thing to keep dragging on, and I don’t want a grudging friendship. Either cordial or over. So there you have my final word. I want you to come right out and take back once and for all, without reservation, what was in your last letters — beginning with the one I sent back to you. This is in my interest, but in yours too, because in so doing you’ll undo behaviour which, if understandable, was nonetheless not exactly spirited of you. In so doing you’ll undo a misunderstanding that you couldn’t in good faith persist in, and clinging to it would be prejudiced spite. On this condition, that you take back everything in those letters, we can begin the friendship anew, and because of this rebuke it may now perhaps be stronger and fare better.
   A reply to this please. As for my family — on the occasion of my father’s death — foreseeing that the misunderstanding with them could have gone on forever — I simply said for the sake of clarity — that as far as practical matters and way of life were concerned, my views were too different for us to able to agree in the long run. That I wanted to act entirely according to my own views, but only for myself. And that I relinquished my share of the inheritance2 — because, having been greatly at odds with my father in the last few years, I didn’t consider that I had any right to nor did I have any wish for what was his. This cut short any further unpleasantness with my family, you’ll admit. So that’s finished, and for the rest I’m getting on very well with them. Where I take such a drastic measure on the one hand, though, please understand that although I would gladly make it up with you, I am far from accepting your complaints, and my condition is and remains complete retraction of your letters which, although the details are correct here and there, I certainly don’t deserve as a whole. Regards. Vincent Dear Mr Kerssemakers, It was with pleasure that I made Wenckebach’s acquaintance. I regard it as not only possible but quite likely that not only he but Rappard, too, will continue to come here from time to time. At least, I’ve known Rappard so long and so well that I’m inclined to believe that he’ll retract a certain misunderstanding which meant that we were cool for a while. I’ve just written to him, but I want total retraction, and without reservation, of certain things that he said about my figures and that I insist I do not deserve. What I wanted to say in connection with your new studies is that for the sake of the foregrounds, in particular, which always seem to me to be too insubstantial and prevent there being enough space in them, is that I suggest it would be very good if you also gave it a try with a perspective frame. For there’s nothing like it for teaching one to look and teaching one to feel perspective. 
   The mistake you make is such that if you do just one with the perspective frame you’ll feel it instantly, other than how I can put it into words. In order to feel something, one must know it, be very familiar with it so that there’s conviction. Wenckebach told me straightaway that he thought you should ‘do a great deal of drawing’. The question that he doesn’t solve, though, is ‘how?’ How? when it’s desirable to take the very shortest route and your case is rather different, very different from that of someone who begins when he’s seventeen and so has nothing else to do. And I see no benefit in making it too difficult, too hard and tough for you. In contrast to and contradicting many others, I maintain that one can definitely still learn to paint something good beginning at a later age, and I stand by that. I do wish we could work together more, though — I would say that I find that really necessary — and 
   unfortunately our getting together always involves rather a lot of time both for you and for me. The old painters always used the perspective frame a lot; it is the shortest way. And unless one blocks things out, as a beginner one is inevitably thrown into confusion by all sorts of things in the surroundings which one oughtn’t to see, in fact may not look at. So I therefore can’t urge it strongly enough. I also want to tell you that the same model I showed you yesterday can be used indoors as well — if one fixes it in a block by means of a screw. And then you can also use it to draw or to paint heads, and for figures outdoors. And I think it would be of such practical help to you, I think that you would get so many new ideas from it, and feel so much more that you can get yourself a great deal further with it, 
   that I’d be very happy to come to you for it the first few times, even if it’s a whole day, so as to help you get the hang of it. So let me know whether I should order one for you here or whether you want to make one yourself at home, which you can do with no more than a few screws. Then you can have mine as a model should you need it. My impression of Wenckebach is very favourable, but all the same I wonder why for God’s sake landscape painters are in the city, why don’t they do what the French do, and firmly install themselves in the country? And he, for one, would be the better for it. You may have noticed that I just bit his head off when he said what others had already said to me, that Stengelin was ‘a strange person’. He’s a Frenchman who has set up a studio in the middle of the heath in Drenthe4 — I didn’t meet him when I was in Drenthe, but I find his example so good and practical that I think it despicable that the Dutch painters who visited him had all sorts of things to say against him. Sincerely, with a handshake Yours truly, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, To my regret I’ve still not had your reply as of today. The more I think about it, the more I, for my part, really do not mind cutting off relations unless you take back once and for all a communication which — in my view — does you no credit. However, I say once more that I’m willing to regard the whole question as a misunderstanding and change nothing in the friendship. But expressly on condition that you yourself realize — that you’ve made a mistake. Since on no account do I want to keep it dragging on, I ask you to answer me this week. And then, according to your letter, will know what to decide. Should you not write this week — then I will no longer desire your answer. And time will just have to tell whether your comments on my work and on my person will prove to be justified or not — in good faith or not. Sincerely,  Vincent Eindhoven, 27 July My dear friend Rappard, That there must necessarily be an end to this nagging is, in the first place, because it really would come to resemble the dispute between a certain two pious ministers who debated a difference of opinion concerning the geographical location of the road to salvation with so much fervour that at a certain moment, with one and the same gesture, they cast their respective wigs in each other’s faces. Those wigs should be part of it — and — how, with the best will in the world, shall we proceed now, for we’re just at the critical point and neither you nor I is in the possession of the indispensable projectile in question? I’m at my wits’ end for this reason, and I’m very sorry that we’ve started something that we now don’t appear capable of crowning with the above-mentioned end — so utterly worthy of the cause.
   I think that the dispute has a decidedly ridiculous side, and would become more and more so, and really, that’s the reason why I don’t want to go into it any further. It’s just too absurd. Be sensible, and put a stop to it on your part, too. Everything that occurs to a person doesn’t necessarily come straight from his conscience — as if your conscience dictated those letters to you? — as if it was your duty to write them? — what — nonsense — laugh at it. However, since you thought it was your duty and thought your conscience impelled you to do it, for my part I’m willing to let the whole matter with all its ramifications drop, and so be DONE. It remains — to ask you whether and, if so, approximately when you’re thinking of coming here to make a number of studies. I would then see to it that you can stay with my mother as usual. Sincerely, Vincent Dear Mr Furnée, In response to your postcard, I should like to put a number of things to you for your consideration. I wrote to you how, after my father’s death, I came to live alone here, and asked you to wait, that I would soon remit to you. But look, perhaps you know that until now I’ve been helped by my brother, who is an art dealer in Paris. I am progressing with my work, though, my chances of selling are better than before, but at the same time it is precisely the moment when financial assistance from others ceases altogether, and I can only count on my own work. My father’s death and my desire to stand entirely on my own are two changes that have made me even poorer for the moment than I was before. And look — suppose you draw a bill of exchange on me, well I cannot pay. Cash, if I have it, is 10 guilders one time, 5 guilders another time, and in order to earn that I have to pay for canvas, paint, brushes again. So if you demand payment, you would have to go to the extreme (if you demand your money) of selling my furniture and whatever else I have.
   They consist of a couple of old chairs, a rough wooden worktable and, in a word, are so worthless that the whole lot would certainly not even fetch 10 guilders in a village like this. What do you gain by so doing? If you want to do this, it would be of little concern to me, but it is decidedly not the way to get your money, but if you wait, I will pay you in full. If you demand payment and take this drastic measure — well, it would be to my advantage. I only have one thing and that is getting better and better, that is my paintings and drawings. I hear both good and ill said of them, and everyone can think of them what they will. As to them — as being the only things with which I can pay you — what do you want? Do you want to wait until I sell something and settle my account? Very well, I’m not dishonest; I will pay you, just as soon as I have it.
   Do you want me to send you some of my work so that you can show it to art lovers? I’d like nothing better. I have inherited — not a penny. Firstly my father was not rich, and secondly none of the children has claimed his share. It seems to me that you have nothing to lose by trying whether you might have success with my painting. I’m prepared to send it to you and perhaps it would not disappoint you. And might even be the cause of my not only being able to pay you, but also to take more paint. I’m as hard up for paint as for money at present. Since I am very afraid of debt I don’t let it mount up; I buy very little and for cash, and only use paint3 that I get ground here.
   If I have to make you wait, it’s because I myself certainly have to wait more patiently than you. As regards demanding payment, I tell you expressly that I am absolutely not asking for clemency, but you would have to go to the extreme. And as I say, it would be to my advantage because I own literally nothing but my tools. Please reply to my letter, in any event. For you should know that of course if you demand payment, you will not achieve your objective that way, and then I would certainly not pay you later, since you would lose your rights. But you will be paid either if you are willing to try on your part to place some of my work for me, or if you wait until I sell something of what I have on hand. I express my regret about it, but the circumstances I inform you of are my excuse. Things are not going badly for me, though, and you must above all not despair about your money, it will be all right, but I shall have to wait more patiently and longer than you. I respectfully remain, Your servant Vincent van Gogh 
    Just one last word. If I were dishonest, certainly no moment could be more suitable for getting out of a number of small debts by letting you draw your bill, and then just awaiting events. But I don’t yet have too much to fear for the relatively very little that I have to pay. I work too hard to be working in vain. If I say to you and to Leurs, who also has to have about 25 guilders from me, go ahead with your bills! then you, not I are the losing party. Be aware once and for all that I’m definitely not afraid of bills. I pay cash for virtually everything, and I tailor my needs to my money such that I sometimes go weeks without spending a guilder, except for a loaf. Last year I had an unfortunate business with a decoration for a dining room, which I made for someone who didn’t pay me. When you consider that, despite every effort, I have still not got over the deficit that this caused 
   — the paint I had from you and Leurs last year was for that — you’ll understand that the year hasn’t been good for me. I don’t have friends — but nonetheless I tell you, do not despair about your money! However, if you could do something yourself about getting my work seen in The Hague — that would be best, and in that way you would perhaps help both yourself and me, too, at the same time. I don’t ask high prices; the sum in question isn’t large. And so I suggest you try it. I do not have money, less than ever, since for me this is the period when I am making myself independent of all subsidies. My dear Uncle, Since Theo is coming to see you1 and I have a request to make of you, I’m taking this opportunity to ask you the following. If you would permit me to come and see your paintings  I haven’t seen any paintings for a long time, and long so much to see some that I’m overlooking everything to ask this of you. Theo has two small studies of mine with him – the colour of both is colder than I should like. I have two others of the same size that are warmer. If you perhaps have any old grooved frames that you don’t have an immediate use for, I should like very much to trade one of these 4 studies for a frame. Respectfully, Your servant Vincent My dear friend Rappard, Today I sent a basket of birds’ nests to your address. I’ve also got them in the studio — quite a lot of them — and I’m sending you some that I have two of. They’re from the thrush, blackbird, golden oriole, wren, chaffinch. I just hope they arrive safely. Have you heard much about Eugène Delacroix? I’ve read a splendid article about him by Silvestre. To write for you a few words from it that occur to me right now — the end of the article went like this: thus died, almost smiling, Eugène Delacroix — a painter of high breeding — who had a sun in his head and a thunderstorm in his heart — who — from warriors went to saints — from saints to lovers — from lovers to tigers — and from tigers to flowers. These words struck me, for the whole article pointed out how in his paintings the mood of colours and tone was at one with the meaning. The contrast of colours, breaking, reciprocal effect from black to white, from yellow to violet, from orange to blue, from red to green.
   Here’s some more: Delacroix writes to a friend: ‘the chapel where I painted my Pietà was so dark that at first I didn’t know how to paint so as to make my painting speak. So I was forced to paint the shadows in Christ’s dead body with Prussian blue, the lights with pure chrome yellow’. Here the writer adds, ‘one has to be Delacroix to dare do that’. Then I read somewhere else, ‘When Delacroix paints – it’s like the lion devouring his piece of flesh’. And Silvestre’s article is particularly full of this latter. What surprising fellows those French painters are. A Millet, Delacroix, Corot, Troyon, Daubigny, Rousseau, and a Daumier or a Jacque, and above all not forgetting Jules Dupré. Lhermitte is a new one of that calibre. Something else about Delacroix — he had a discussion with a friend about the question of working absolutely from nature, and said on that occasion that one should take one’s studies from nature — but that the actual painting had to be made 
  by heart. This friend was walking along the boulevard when they had this discussion — which was already fairly heated. When they parted the other man was still not entirely persuaded. After they parted, Delacroix let him stroll on for a bit — then (making a trumpet of his two hands) bellowed after him in the middle of the street — to the consternation of the worthy passers-by: By heart! By heart!6 I can’t tell you how much I enjoyed reading this article and some other things about Delacroix, too, by Gigoux. I’ve also read a beautiful book by Bracquemond, the etcher — Du dessin et de la couleur. Something else on Delacroix. Silvestre writes: they say that Delacroix doesn’t draw — say rather that Delacroix doesn’t draw like the rest. How much — my dear friend — could one say THE SAME in response to the assertion that Mauve, Israëls, Maris don’t draw!
   Something else — the painter Gigoux comes to Delacroix with an ancient bronze and asks his opinion as to whether it’s genuine: It’s not from antiquity, it’s Renaissance, says D. Gigoux asks him for his reason. Look — my friend — it’s very fine, but it starts from the line, and the ancients started from the centres (from the masses, from cores). Then he adds, ‘Look here a moment’, and draws a few ovals on a scrap of paper — he connects these ovals to one another with delicate little lines, with almost nothing, and creates a rearing horse from them, full of life and movement. That, he says, is what Géricault and Gros learnt from the Greeks, to express the masses (almost always egg-shaped) first, then derive the outline and the action from the position and proportion of these egg shapes. And I, says Delacroix, was first shown this by Géricault. I ask you, isn’t that a splendid truth! But — — — does one learn it from the plaster statue copiers and at the art academy? I believe: not. If they taught like that, I’d be happy to enthuse about the academy, but I know only too well that this isn’t the case. I sent Wenckebach an article about the Salon by Paul Mantz, and asked him to let you read it too. Did you get it? I found it excellent. I thought you might like the birds’ nests as I do, because the birds — like the wren or golden oriole — can also truly be counted among the artists. At the same time they’re good for still lifes. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear friend Rappard, I just received your letter and croquis of your painting. It’s certainly a good subject, and I have nothing against the composition as regards balance. May I say one thing — which I would not say if the painting was finished and consequently difficult to alter — which I do say since certain changes that do not concern the lines could be made to advantage? Look — the figure in the middle of the painting — the woman with the rake. Good in its place, but — raking the yard is an action that’s too much of a minor detail for a central figure to be carrying out, it seems to me. For this reason, for my part I would rather see the figure in the middle — in the foreground — carrying bricks (that being a very expressive and characteristic action here, accounted for by the whole thing). I would rather put the rake in the hands of the figure in the middle ground (who is now carrying bricks (and occupies a secondary place in the composition)). Is this possible? In respect to the progress of the work? If not — just think if you will about the question — for it seems to me that it’s not unimportant — and comments could be made about it. The fact that the figure is upright there is good, but — without altering the lines — isn’t there a more interesting action you could think of? Don’t hold this against me, please — I don’t think it can do any harm to put forward things like this for consideration when a painting is being planned. I don’t think that this is forcibly pressing my ideas on you. Making the actions expressive is an extremely important matter, in my view, particularly if the painting is to be a large format. I know this is asking a lot — I know that the lines and the balance of the lines may lay down the law here. 
   But those lines may well remain beautiful and tranquil. Anyway — I believe that it may be that I’m not wrong in this respect — and it’s about your central figure — so I didn’t dare not say what my impression was. If it’s not asking too much, I’d like to suggest having one of the brick-carriers stoop and put down the bricks, so that they aren’t both doing the same. But it comes to the same thing, since there would then be two stooping figures. And after all, that doesn’t matter so much. But the first comment is actually what I feel above all. As regards my work, the thing with those potato eaters that you saw the lithograph of is a subject that I tried to paint, carried away by the singular lighting of the dingy cottage. It’s in such a low spectrum that the light colours, smeared on white paper, say, would look like ink blots — they appear as lights on the canvas because of the strong forces that are opposed to them, for instance Prussian blue laid on just as it is, without mixing. My own criticism is that while paying attention to this I lost sight of the shape of the torsos. Heads and hands were done with great care, though, and — since these were the most important and the rest almost entirely dark (so really quite different in effect from the lithograph), it may perhaps be more excusable of me than you think to have painted it as I did. And besides, the drawing in the actual painting is also different from either the rough sketch that I still have of it4 and which I made in the cottage in the evening by the light of a small lamp, or the lithograph. 
   I also wanted to tell you that since you were here I’ve painted a fairly large number of heads, and drawn quite a lot of figures of peasants, diggers, weeders, reapers. That in all this, either directly or indirectly, the great question occupied me — colour. I mean the breaking of the colours, red with green, blue with orange, yellow with violet. Always how the complementary colours go together, their influence on each other. Of which nature is as full as of light and shade. Another question — which I’m engrossed in every day — is precisely the one that you — I think unjustly — asserted that I neglect: the rendering of the modelling of the form, its main lines and masses, where one thinks of outline in the last place, not the first. See herewith a couple of croquis of small compositions — both of which I’ve painted. I’ve mostly been working in a fairly small format lately. As I continue to focus my attention specifically on the peasants, the landscape is something that I’m involved with every single day. I had just painted some cottages when Wenckebach came to see me. I have literally nothing new as regards woodcuts, apart from — 4 large compositions by Lhermitte. To me, that man is MILLET II in the full sense of the word; I idolize his work as I do that of Millet himself. I think his genius on a par with that of Millet I. 
   My brother was here just recently, he told me several things about what’s going on in Paris that I find very encouraging. The success of the Eugène Delacroix exhibition. Then I was interested in what he told me about Raffaëlli, a figure painter, and Claude Monet, a colourist landscape painter. For the rest, you’ll notice it for yourself — it’s not so much a golden as an iron age for painters — I mean it’s not exactly easy to even stay alive. At least as far as I’m concerned, it’s sheer destitution — only with all that, my courage and perhaps my powers, too, are greater rather than less than before. Don’t think you’re the only one who thinks or thought — as you will — he had to criticize me to the point of total destruction — on the contrary, it’s pretty much the only thing I’ve experienced so far. Precisely because you aren’t or weren’t the only one who speaks solely like this, your criticism is related to other criticism, which, for my part, I counter with a conviction of having a raison d’être for my endeavours — and — will continue to counter more and more. The reason why I — although I didn’t insist on my way but let you have your way — the reason why I started by asking you to consider — complete retraction of your criticism, wasn’t that I despotically wanted to bend or break your opinions. That wasn’t my intention in the least, although that’s how you took it. 
   Here are details that are perfectly correct. I let fly at you about drawing plaster models, and I even have to confess frankly that I’d be capable of doing it again. And about other questions — I can’t always sit quietly by; it sometimes seems to me as if people are physically touching me, so bound to the question do I sometimes feel and so much is my conviction sometimes a part of myself. It’s true that there are definitely faults in the lithograph and in much other work, too. But in other work I prove too clearly what I’m seeking for people to be justified or acting in good faith when they do other than judge it as a whole and more broadly — taking into account the aim and endeavour — namely to paint peasants in their setting — the peasant at home. Now you call that totality of my work extremely weak, and demonstrate at great length that the faults outnumber the qualities. Thus about my work, thus about my person. 
   Well now, I do not accept that, definitely not. The work in question, painting the peasants, is such laborious work that the extremely weak would never even embark on it. And I have at least embarked on it and have laid certain foundations, which isn’t exactly the easiest part of the job! And I’ve grasped some solid and useful things in drawing and in painting, more firmly than you think, my dear friend. But I keep on making what I can’t do yet in order to learn to be able to do it. But it bores me and you to write about this. I’ll end by saying the labour is hard, and it would be wise for the fellows who paint peasants and the common people to join hands as much as is possible instead of quarrelling. Unity is strength, and what we should be fighting is not one another but those fellows who, even now in this period, stand in the way of the progress of the ideas for which Millet and others of a previous generation fought and were pioneers. Nothing is more obstructive than this fatal quarrelling among ourselves. And as for you and me, let this be at an end, for our objective is the same. 
   But my reason was precisely that your endeavour and mine, although they’re not the same, nonetheless run parallel rather than being diametrically opposed. And while as a direction and in principle there are points of agreement enough and, I think, will continue to be, it occurred to me that your criticism as a whole was inconsistent, in its application to me, with the character of your own work. We have in common with each other that we seek our subjects in the heart of the people, and then we have in common a need — either as an objective or as a means — to take our studies from reality. And that — is having a lot in common with each other. And at bottom, as to whether we’re opposed in regard to either drawing technique or painting technique, I for my part am not convinced of that. You’re ahead of me in many things, I don’t deny it, but I still believe you went too far. But be that as it may — what I consider desirable is that because if we want to and try to we could perhaps be of use and give support to each other — and because unity is strength — we must remain friends. 
   As regards technique — I’m still searching for many things and with me it’s the case that, although I find some of them, there remain infinitely many that I lack. But — all the same, I know why I work as I work — and base my search on solid ground. I said to Wenckebach recently that I didn’t know a painter who had as many faults as I have — but that for all that it did not convince me that I’m radically wrong. With me it’s sometimes a matter of: two negatives making a positive. Take whichever study or drawing of mine you like, even the one I’d point out to you myself with relative equanimity. And — there’ll be mistakes both in the drawing and in the colour or tone that a realist wouldn’t readily make. Certain inaccuracies of which I’m convinced myself, which if need be I myself will sometimes point out more severely than other people. Inaccuracies sometimes, or imperfections. And yet I believe that — even if I keep producing work in which people, if they want to look at it precisely from that angle and with that aim, can find faults — it will have a certain life of its own and raison d’être that will overwhelm those faults — in the eyes of those who appreciate character and mulling things over in their minds. 
   And with all my faults, people won’t find it as easy to overwhelm me as they think. I know too well what aim I have in view, I’m too absolutely and utterly convinced that I am, after all, on the right path — when I want to paint what I feel and feel what I paint — to worry too much about what people say of me. All the same, it sometimes makes life very difficult for me and — I consider it very possible that some people will later regret either the things they said about me, or the opposition or indifference with which they plagued me. What I do in response is withdraw so much that I literally don’t see anybody other than — the peasants — with whom I’m directly concerned in order to paint them. And this will remain my system, and it may even very well be that before long I’ll give up my studio and go and live in a cottage, so that I no longer hear or see anything of those who call themselves civilized people. When I say to you that I want to remain friends, and mean it, though, it’s because I see in you an endeavour that I regard very highly. You go deep into the people and you have the strength of will to carry it through. When I say we could perhaps be of use and give support to each other — then I say it 
 0  because, in the event that you don’t submit to conventions, you will probably, as you become better known, possibly make even bolder things, and then it could come to a positive clash between paintings of one school and another. And in such circumstances it could be a good thing for various painters to act in unison. From another angle — I don’t think it’s useless to share ideas and see one another’s work.  Here’s a third little scratch of a study I did yesterday. Regards — I feel obliged to offer the comment about the action of the woman in the middle of your composition for your consideration; for the rest I think the composition very sensible and the whole design sympathetic. When you see Wenckebach, would you please give him my regards. Yours truly, Vincent You can see from my croquis that, for my part, I take a lot of trouble specifically to get action — being occupied — doing something — into my figures. I think it’s good that one figure in your composition, at any rate, is already stooping — being in the process of working is perhaps something that a lot of vertical lines in the composition would make harder to express.  My dear Theo, We1 received your letter this morning. And think that it’s very good that you’ve already raised the matter — and broken the ice in so far as you’ve spoken to the Dutch gentlemen about it &c. And I don’t yet see that my ‘it’ll go full steam ahead’ is wrong, since I myself can see that full steam ahead is in prospect and right now only in so far as our energy must be at full steam ahead. I do see it in prospect. And as to right now, you still remember that I said to you: come away empty-handed this time if need be, but then at least it has been discussed – and then there will have to be a second trip to Holland by Bonger and you together. For the time being there’s every reason to say, with père Pangloss, all is for the best in the best of possible worlds. But now, old chap, the solution to the S. question4 that you give in your letter of today, that’s to say ‘Either she goes or I go’, would be very short, sweet and conclusive — if it were practicable. But you’ll run up against difficulties that Bonger and I have been facing these last few days, and which we’re doing our utmost best to shed light on. These difficulties are different from what you think, but now isn’t the time to go into details: we’ll tell you all about it when you get back. That you don’t belong with S. nor S. with you is absolutely certain, it seems to me. And that it has to be finished, too — but how? It’s a good thing for you to be prepared that the affair perhaps cannot be ended in the way you suggest, because by rushing her you could simply either provoke her to suicide or send her mad, and the effect of that on you would be tragic, of course, and could shatter you for ever. 
   So no accidents please. Now I’ve also told Bonger what I told you, that you’ll have to pass her on to someone else, and I told Bonger at length how I saw it – that an amicable arrangement which is virtually self-evident is that you pass her on to me. This much is certain, if both you and she were willing to accept it, then I’m prepared to take S. over from you, preferably, though, without marrying her, but if it works out better then even with a marriage of convenience. I’m writing this to you in a few words so that you’d still have time to think about it before your return. Since this way she could do the housekeeping, and since she can support herself by her work, it would be an economy for you rather than the other way round. Lucie5 has been given notice; I told her that you wouldn’t go on with it because it worked out too expensive, but kept her on until your return because you can then decide how the housekeeping will be, and in the event that this decision can’t be taken straightaway it’s probably advisable to keep the housekeeping on the same footing as regards Lucie until something is decided with S. If you could enter into this arrangement yourself, then I see as the first consequence for you that you would feel yourself an entirely free man and your own engagement6 would go full steam ahead. Courage and composure. As regards the work, I have a pendant for that bouquet that you have with you, and also a branch of white lilies — white, pink, green — against black, in the spirit of black Japanese lacquer8 inlaid with mother-of-pearl that you know — then a branch of orange tiger lilies on a blue ground, then a bouquet of dahlias, violet on a yellow ground, and red gladioli in a blue vase on light yellow. Bonger is reading Au bonheur des dames10 and I’ve read Bel-ami by Guy de Maupassant.
   Do you know that Bonger and S. are sleeping here, and these are strange days, sometimes we’re very, very afraid of her, and sometimes we’re almighty merry and cheerful. But S. is terribly deranged, and it’s not over by a long shot.  Both of you will only feel that it’s finally finished between you and her when you see each other again, and so you don’t have to fear that you’ll get caught again. But you’ll have to talk to her a lot and try to get her settled. Think about it in the meantime between now and when you come back; serious remedies for serious ills.  Bonger will certainly add something to this, unless he writes to you today from his office. Regards to everyone at home, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I’d be very pleased with the exchange for 2 Isabey watercolours, particularly if they’re figures by Isabey. See if you can exchange the pendant I have here as well and get something else as well. Tell me, is it impossible to get the Otto Weber from Princenhage, that fine autumn? For that I would make a series of 4 for them. Paintings are more use to us than drawings, but do what’s convenient.  I’m also convinced of the basis of V.’s reasoning. The issue is to open S.’s eyes. She’s not in love with you at all, but it’s as if you’ve bewitched her. Morally she is seriously sick. It is obvious that we can’t abandon her to her fate in that condition. On the contrary, we’ve been as cordial towards her as possible. If we hadn’t done that she would have gone mad. What makes me hope for her recovery is what she said to me yesterday evening: “How stupid of me that I can’t think straight.” So she does seem to realize where it has gone wrong. The great difficulty is her stubbornness, and we’ve 
      
    run up against that several times. Treating her harshly doesn’t work. It’s extremely difficult to come up with a plan in advance (Vincent’s is unworkable, in my opinion), but I hope that you realize from this that you’ve dealt with her the wrong way. The relationship of the past year has done nothing but make her lose her head. It would perhaps have been far better if you had lived together completely, then she would have seen for herself that you absolutely did not belong together. If she could live with someone else for a month who succeeded in fascinating her, who took care of her (for she needs a lot of care) and revived her health, you would be forgotten. Her condition is a lot like the nervous exhaustion of most girls in Holland. It will be no less difficult to convince S. of hers than to calm the emotions over there. I suspect that you won’t have seen my sister Jo and Annie; I think both of them are out of town. We both long to know how matters stand in Amsterdam. I was very pleased to hear that V. is now getting recognition. What repayment for the steadfast faith that you’ve had in him! He has made a few very beautiful things; the ones on a yellow ground look very good. The ensemble of flower pieces is very gay and colourful; some, though, are flat, but I just can’t persuade him of that. He keeps replying: but I wanted to get this or that colour contrast into it. As if I gave a damn what he wanted to do! Write to tell us when you’re coming back. Try to come with renewed vitality and a clear mind and a steadfast will. All three are necessary. The situation otherwise isn’t hopeless at all, but it is worrying. Spijker is only very slowly getting better. My regards to your family, and believe me wholeheartedly
 your friend Bonger My dear Mr Livens, Since I am here in Paris I have very often thought of your self and work. You will remember that I liked your colour, your ideas on art and litterature and I add, most of all, your personality.  I have already before now thought that I ought to let you know what I was doing, where I was.  But what refrained me was that I find living in Paris is much dearer than in Antwerp and not knowing what your circumstances are I dare not say Come over to Paris, without warning you that it costs one dearer than Antwerp and that if poor, one has to suffer many things. As you may imagine. But on the other hand there is more chance of selling.  There is also a good chance of exchanging pictures with other artists.  In one word, with much energy, with a sincere personal feeling of colour in nature I would say an artist can get on here notwithstanding the many obstructions. And I intend remaining here still longer.
    There is much to be seen here – for instance Delacroix to name only one master.  In Antwerp I did not even know what the Impressionists were, now I have seen them2 and though not being one of the club, yet I have much admired certain Impressionist pictures – degas, nude figure – Claude Monet, landscape.  And now for what regards what I myself have been doing, I have lacked money for paying models, else I had entirely given myself to figure painting but I have made a series of colour studies in painting simply flowers, red poppies, blue corn flowers and myosotys. White and rose roses, yellow chrysantemums – seeking oppositions of blue with orange, red and green, yellow and violet, seeking THE BROKEN AND NEUTRAL TONESa to harmonise brutal extremes.
    Trying to render intense COLOUR  and not a grey harmony. Now after these gymnastics6 I lately did two heads7 which I dare say are better in light and colour than those I did before.  So as we said at the time in COLOUR  seeking life, the true drawing is modelling with colour.  I did a dozen landscapes too, frankly green, frankly blue.  And so I am struggling for life and progress in art.  Now I would very much like to know what you are doing and whether you ever think of going to Paris.  If ever you did come here, write to me before and I will, if you like, share my lodgings and studio9 with you so long as I have any. In spring – say February or even sooner – I may be going to the south of France, the land of the blue tones and gay colours.
    And look here, if I knew you had longings for the same we might combine. I felt sure at the time that you are a thorough colourist and since I saw the Impressionists I assure you that neither your colour nor mine as it is developping itself, is exactly the same as their theories but so much dare I say, we have a chance and a good one of finding friends.  I hope your health is all right. I was rather low down in health when in Antwerp but got better here.  Write to me, in any case remember me to Allan, Briët, Rink, Durand, but I have not so often thought on any of them as I did think of you – almost daily.  Shaking hands cordially. Yours truly, Vincent My present adress is Mr Vincent van Gogh 54 Rue Lepic Paris 
   What regards my chances of sale, look here, they are certainly not much but still I do have a beginning.  At this present moment I have found four dealers who have exhibited studies of mine. And I have exchanged studies with several artists.  Now the prices are 50 francs. Certainly not much but – as far as I can see one must sell cheap to rise, and even at costing price. And mind my dear fellow, Paris is Paris, there is but one Paris and however hard living may be here and if it became worse and harder even – the french air clears up the brain and does one good – a world of good.  I have been in Cormons studio for three or four months but did not find that as useful as I had expected it to be. It may be my fault however, any how I left there too as I left Antwerp and since I worked alone, and fancy that since I feel my own self more.
    Trade is slow here, the great dealers sell Millet, Delacroix, Corot, Daubigny, Dupré, a few other masters at exorbitant prices. They do little or nothing for young artists. The second class dealers contrariwise sell those but at very low prices. If I asked more I would do nothing, I fancy. However I have faith in colour, even what regards the price the public will pay for it in the longer run.  But for the present things are awfully hard, therefore let anyone who risks to go over here consider there is no laying on roses at all.  What is to be gained is progress and, what the deuce, that it is to be found here I dare ascertain. Anyone who has a solid position elsewhere, let him stay where he is but for adventurers as myself I think they lose nothing in risking more. Especially as in my case I am not an adventurer by choice but by fate and feeling nowhere so much myself a stranger as in my family and country.  Kindly remember me to your landlady Mrs Roosmaelen15 and say her that if she will exhibit something of my work I will send her a small picture of mine. 54 rue Lepic Dear Sir, I’ve spoken to Mr Boggs about the meeting I had with you1 and if you would like to do an exchange with him2 be bold about it, because you’ll see fine things at his place3 and he’ll be very pleased to make your acquaintance. I also propose myself for an exchange. I happen to have 2 views of the Moulin de la Galette that I could spare. Hoping to see you one of these days, then, I shake your hand. Yours truly, Vincent Do go and see my brother too (Goupil & Cie, 19 boulevard Montmartre), he has a very fine Degas at the moment. At Tanguy’s I had another look at your young girl with hens, that’s just the study I’d like to exchange with you. Enclosed, one of my brother’s cards, if you didn’t find him there you could always go up and look at the paintings. Paris, 1 Sept. 1887. Dear Sir, Your Honour will remember that when I left Nuenen with the intention of coming back to Holland, it was sufficient for me to take a notice of removal with me (to Antwerp) — (see 23 November 1885). My travel plans having wholly changed, and wishing to register myself in Paris, the paper Your Honour gave me is only sufficient temporarily. And so I hereby request you simply to send me a domestic passport, which together with the notice of removal to Antwerp is sufficient proof of my identity. Would you be so kind as to send this paper to my mother’s address: Nieuwe Ginnekenstraat Breda4 
   or directly to my address: V.W. van Gogh 54 rue Lepic Paris. Thanking Your Honour in advance for your trouble, I remain, yours faithfully, Your Honour’s obedient servant Vincent W. van Gogh My dear little sister, I thank you for your letter, although for my part I so detest writing these days, however there are questions in your letter that I do want to answer. I must begin by contradicting you where you say that you thought Theo looked ‘so wretched’ this summer. For my part, I think on the contrary that Theo’s appearance has become much more distinguished in the last year. You have to be strong to endure life in Paris the way he has for so many years. But might it not be that Theo’s family and friends in Amsterdam and The Hague haven’t treated him and even not received him with the cordiality that he deserved from them and to which he was entitled? I can tell you in that regard that he was perhaps a little hurt by this, but he’s otherwise not letting it bother him, and now, when times are so bad in paintings, he’s still doing business, so it could be there’s some professional jealousy on the part of his Dutch friends. Now what shall I say about your little piece about the plants and the rain? You see for yourself in nature that many a flower is trampled, freezes or is parched, further that not every grain of wheat, once it has ripened, ends up in the earth again to germinate there and become a stalk — but far and away the most grains do not develop but go to the mill — don’t they? Now comparing people with grains of wheat — in every person who’s healthy and natural there’s the power to germinate as in a grain of wheat. And so natural life is germinating. What the power to germinate is in wheat, so love is in us. Now we, I think, stand there pulling a long face or at a loss for words when, being thwarted in our natural development, we see that germination frustrated and ourselves placed in circumstances as hopeless as they must be for the wheat between the millstones. If this happens to us and we’re utterly bewildered by the loss of our natural life, there are some among us who, willing to submit themselves to the course of things as they are, nonetheless don’t abandon their self-awareness and want to know how things are with them and what’s actually happening. 
   And searching with good intentions in the books of which it is said they are a light in the darkness, with the best will in the world we find precious little certain at all and not always satisfaction to comfort us personally. And the diseases from which we civilized people suffer the most are melancholia and pessimism. Like me, for instance, who can count so many years in my life when I completely lost all inclination to laugh, leaving aside whether or not this was my own fault, I for one need above all just to have a good laugh. I found that in Guy de Maupassant and there are others here, Rabelais2 among the old writers, Henri Rochefort3 among today’s, where one can find that — Voltaire in Candide. On the contrary, if one wants truth, life as it is, De Goncourt, for example, in Germinie Lacerteux, La fille Elisa, Zola in La joie de vivre7 and L’assommoir8 and so many other masterpieces paint life as we feel it ourselves and thus satisfy that need which we have, that people tell us the truth. The work of the French naturalists Zola, Flaubert, Guy de Maupassant, De Goncourt, Richepin, Daudet, Huysmans is magnificent and one can scarcely be said to belong to one’s time if one isn’t familiar with them. Maupassant’s masterpiece is Bel-ami; I hope to be able to get it for you. Is the Bible enough for us? Nowadays I believe Jesus himself would again say to those who just sit melancholy, it is not here, it is risen. Why seek ye the living among the dead? If the spoken or written word is to remain the light of the world, it’s our right and our duty to acknowledge that we live in an age in which it’s written in such a way, spoken in such a way that in order to find something as great and as good and as original, and just as capable of overturning the whole old society as in the past, we can safely compare it with the old upheaval by the Christians. 
   For my part, I’m always glad that I’ve read the Bible better than many people nowadays, just because it gives me a certain peace that there have been such lofty ideas in the past. But precisely because I think the old is good, I find the new all the more so. All the more so because we can take action ourselves in our own age, and both the past and the future affect us only indirectly. My own fortunes dictate above all that I’m making rapid progress in growing up into a little old man, you know, with wrinkles, with a bristly beard, with a number of false teeth &c. But what does that matter? I have a dirty and difficult occupation, painting, and if I weren’t as I am I wouldn’t paint, but being as I am I often work with pleasure, and I see the possibility glimmering through of making paintings in which there’s some youth and freshness, although my own youth is one of those things I’ve lost. If I didn’t have Theo it wouldn’t be possible for me to do justice to my work, but because I have him as a friend I believe that I’ll make more progress and that things will run their course. It’s my plan to go to the south for a while, as soon as I can, where there’s even more colour and even more sun.  But what I hope to achieve is to paint a good portrait. Anyway. Now to get back to your little piece, I feel uneasy about assuming for my own use or recommending to others for theirs the belief that powers above us intervene personally to help us or to comfort us. Providence is such a strange thing, and I tell you that I definitely don’t know what to make of it. Well, in your piece there’s always a certain sentimentality and in its form, above all, it’s reminiscent of the stories about providence already referred to above, let’s say the providence in question, stories that so repeatedly failed to hold water and against which so very much could be said. 
   And above all I find it a very worrying matter that you believe you have to study in order to write. No, my dear little sister, learn to dance or fall in love with one or more notary’s clerks, officers, in short whoever’s within your reach; rather, much rather commit any number of follies than study in Holland, it serves absolutely no purpose other than to make someone dull, and so I won’t hear of it. For my part, I still continually have the most impossible and highly unsuitable love affairs from which, as a rule, I emerge only with shame and disgrace. And in this I’m absolutely right, in my own view, because I tell myself that in earlier years, when I should have been in love, I immersed myself in religious and socialist affairs and considered art more sacred, more than now. Why are religion or law or art so sacred? People who do nothing other than be in love are perhaps more serious and holier than those who sacrifice their love and their heart to an idea. Be this as it may, to write a book, to perform a deed, to make a painting with life in it, one must be a living person oneself. And so for you, unless you never want to progress, studying is very much a side issue. Enjoy yourself as much as you can and have as many distractions as you can, and be aware that what people want in art nowadays has to be very lively, with strong colour, very intense. So intensify your own health and strength and life a little, that’s the best study. It would please me if you would write and tell me how Margot Begemann14 is doing and how they’re doing at De Groot’s. How did that business turn out? Did Sien de Groot marry her cousin? And did her child live? What I think about my own work is that the painting of the peasants eating potatoes that I did in Nuenen is after all the best thing I did. Only since then I haven’t had the opportunity to find models, but on the contrary have had the opportunity to study the question of colour. And if I do find models for my figures again later, then I hope to show that I’m looking for something other than little green landscapes or flowers. Last year I painted almost nothing but flowers to accustom myself to a colour other than grey, that’s to say pink, soft or bright green, light blue, violet, yellow, orange, fine red. And when I painted landscape in Asnières this summer I saw more colour in it than before. I’m studying this now in portraits.
   And I have to tell you that I’m painting none the worse for it, perhaps because I could tell you very many bad things about both painters and paintings if I wanted to, just as easily as I could tell you good things about them. I don’t want to be one of the melancholics or those who become sour and bitter and morbid. To understand all is to forgive all, and I believe that if we knew everything we’d arrive at a certain serenity. Now having this serenity as much as possible, even when one knows — little — nothing — for certain, is perhaps a better remedy against all ills than what’s sold in the chemist’s. A lot comes of its own accord, one grows and develops of one’s own accord. So don’t study and swot too much, because that makes for sterility. Enjoy yourself too much rather than too little, and don’t take art or love too seriously either — one can do little about it oneself, it’s mostly a matter of temperament. If I were living near you, I’d try to make you understand that it might be more practical for you to paint with me than to write, and that you might be more able to express your feelings that way. At any rate I can do something about painting personally, but as far as writing’s concerned I’m not in the business. Anyway, it’s not a bad idea for you to want to become an artist, because if one has fire in one, and soul, one can’t keep stifling them and — one would rather burn than suffocate. What’s inside must get out. Me, for instance, it gives me air when I make a painting, and without that I’d be unhappier than I am. Give Ma my very warmest regards. Vincent 
   A la recherche du bonheur19 affected me very greatly. Now I’ve just read Mont-Oriol by Guy de Maupassant. Art often seems to be something very lofty and, as you say, something sacred. But that’s true of love too. And the problem is simply that not everyone thinks about it like that, and those who feel something of it and allow themselves to be swept away by it suffer greatly, firstly because of being misunderstood, but as much because our inspiration is so often inadequate or the work is made impossible by circumstances. One should be able to do two or preferably several things at the same time. And there are times when it’s by no means clear to us that art should be something sacred or good. Anyway, think carefully about whether it isn’t better, if one has a feeling for art and wants to work in it, to say that one is doing it because one was created with that feeling and can’t do anything else and is following one’s nature, than to say one is doing it for a good cause. Does it not say in A la recherche du bonheur that evil lies in our own natures — which we didn’t create ourselves? What I think is so good about the moderns is that they don’t moralize like the old ones. It seems coarse to many people, for instance, and they’re angered by it: vice and virtue are chemical products like sugar and vitriol. 54 rue Lepic. My dear old Bernard, I feel the need to beg your pardon for leaving you so abruptly the other day. Which I therefore do herewith, without delay. I recommend that you read Tolstoy’s Les Légendes Russes, and I’ll also let you have the article on E. Delacroix that I’ve spoken to you about. I, for my part, did go to Guillaumin’s anyway, but in the evening, and I thought that perhaps you didn’t know his address, which is 13 quai d’Anjou. I believe that, as a man, Guillaumin has sounder ideas than the others, and that if we were all like him we’d produce more good things and would have less time and inclination to be at each other’s throats. I persist in believing that — not because I gave you a piece of my mind but because it will become your own conviction — I persist in believing that you’ll realize that in the studios not only does one not learn very much as far as painting goes, but not much that’s good in terms of savoir vivre, either. 
   And that one finds oneself obliged to learn to live, as one does to paint, without resorting to the old tricks and trompe l’oeil of schemers.  I don’t think your portrait of yourself will be your last, or your best6 — although all in all it’s frightfully you. Look here — briefly, what I was trying to explain to you the other day comes down to this. In order to avoid generalities, let me take an example from life. If you’ve fallen out with a painter, with Signac, for example, and if as a result you say: if Signac exhibits where I exhibit, I’ll withdraw my canvases  — and if you run him down, then it seems to me that you’re not behaving as well as you could behave. Because it’s better to take a long look at it before judging so categorically, and to reflect, reflection making us see in ourselves, when there’s a falling out, as many faults on our own side as in our adversary, and in him as many justifications as we might desire for ourselves. 
   If, therefore, you’ve already considered that Signac and the others who are doing pointillism often make very beautiful things with it — Instead of running those things down, one should respect them and speak of them sympathetically, especially when there’s a falling out. Otherwise one becomes a narrow sectarian oneself, and the equivalent of those who think nothing of others and believe themselves to be the only righteous ones.  This extends even to the academic painters, because take, for example, a painting by Fantin-Latour — and above all his entire oeuvre. Well then — there’s someone who hasn’t rebelled, and does that prevent him, that indefinable calm and righteousness that he has, from being one of the most independent characters in existence? I also wanted to say a word to you about the military service that you’ll be required to do. You must absolutely see to that now. Directly, in order to inform yourself properly about what one can do in such an event; first to retain the right to work, to be able to choose a garrison, &c. But indirectly, by taking care of your health. You mustn’t arrive there 
   too anaemic or too agitated if you want to emerge from it stronger.  I don’t see it as a very great misfortune for you that you have to join the army, but as a very grave ordeal, from which, if you emerge from it, you’ll emerge a very great artist. Until then, do all you can to build yourself up, because you’ll need quite a bit of spirit. If you work hard that year, I believe that you may well succeed in having a fair stock of canvases, some of which we’ll try to sell for you, knowing that you’ll need pocket money to pay for models. I’ll gladly do all I can to make a success of what was started in the dining-room, but I believe that the first condition for success is to put aside petty jealousies; it’s only unity that makes strength. It’s well worth sacrificing selfishness, the ‘each man for himself’, in the common interest. I shake your hand firmly.  Vincent My dear sister, For my part, I could just as well say that I’ll stop writing to you immediately at the moment you reply to me;1 the simplest thing is not to write if it’s too much trouble and one doesn’t always feel inclined. But be this as it may, it’s very good that you’re starting by finding out what sort of harm that wretch Voltaire has done — and you’ll certainly find this in Candide, that Voltaire dared to laugh at the ‘highly serious life which we ought only to devote to or spend on the best ends’. And I don’t have to tell you that this crime is terrible enough in itself. I can’t really write about Mauve, I think about him every day, and that’s all there is to it. It has affected me very badly3 but personally, as a human being, he was perhaps very different from what people sometimes said, that’s to say deeper in life itself than in art perhaps, and I loved him as a human being — now I find it so hard to imagine that those who penetrate to the heart of life, 
   who by the way judge themselves as if it were another, and deal with others with as little embarrassment as if they were dealing with themselves, I find it so hard to imagine that such people cease to exist. Now I know that it’s fairly impossible for the white potato or salad grubs that turn into May bugs later to be capable of forming credible ideas about their future overground existence. And that it would be rash of them to undertake overground studies to throw light on this question, since the gardener or others interested in salad and vegetables would immediately trample them underfoot as being harmful insects. But for parallel reasons I have little faith in the rightness of our human ideas concerning our future life. We can no more judge our own metamorphoses impartially and sagely than the white salad grubs can theirs. For the same reason that a salad grub has to eat salad roots for its higher development —  so I believe that a painter has to make paintings — perhaps that there’s something else after that.
   You see that I’ve gone somewhat further to the south — I’ve seen only too clearly that I cannot prosper with either my work or my health in the winter — moreover, nowadays people are demanding colour contrasts and highly intense and variegated colours in paintings rather than a subdued grey colour. So I thought for one reason and another that I wouldn’t do anyone any harm if I just went to what attracted me. Give Ma my warmest regards; for the time being there will certainly not be any chance of my coming back to Holland. Regards. Vincent  My dear Bernard, Having promised to write to you, I want to begin by telling you that this part of the world seems to me as beautiful as Japan for the clearness of the atmosphere and the gay colour effects. The stretches of water2 make patches of a beautiful emerald and a rich blue in the landscapes, as we see it in the Japanese prints. Pale orange sunsets making the fields look blue — glorious yellow suns. However, so far I’ve hardly seen this part of the world in its usual summer splendour. The women’s costume is pretty, and especially on the boulevard on Sunday you see some very naive and well-chosen arrangements of colour. And that, too, will doubtless get even livelier in summer. 
   I regret that living here isn’t as cheap as I’d hoped, and until now I haven’t found a way of getting by as easily as one could do in Pont-Aven. I started out paying 5 francs and now I’m on 4 francs a day. One would need to know the local patois, and know how to eat bouillabaisse and aïoli, then one would surely find an inexpensive family boarding-house. Then if there were several of us, I’m inclined to believe we’d get more favourable terms. Perhaps there’d be a real advantage in emigrating to the south for many artists in love with sunshine and colour. The Japanese may not be making progress in their country, but there’s no doubt that their art is being carried on in France. At the top of this letter I’m sending you a little croquis of a study that’s preoccupying me as to how to make something of it — sailors coming back with their sweethearts towards the town, which projects the strange silhouette of its drawbridge against a huge yellow sun. I have another study of the same drawbridge with a group of washerwomen. Shall be happy to have a line from you to know what you’re doing and where you’re going to go. A very warm handshake to you and the friends. Yours truly, Vincent My dear sister, So as not to let your letter go unanswered I’m writing immediately upon receipt of your letter and Ma’s and the good wishes from you both. You should know that I’d be very happy to write to you more often were it not that quite a lot of things contribute to my not being master of my time, and you mustn’t imagine that I do exactly what I want or leave what I’d rather not do. The work has me in its grip now, I think for all time, and although this isn’t unhappy, I nonetheless imagine happiness as something very different. To begin with, it gave me an enormous amount of pleasure here that relations have begun between Theo and Mr Tersteeg in order to make the work of the painters from here whom they call Impressionists known in Holland too. For myself I have no regrets about having come here, since I find nature here almighty beautiful. By next year — when the World Exhibition will be held3 — I have to make a mass of things, because my friends will certainly also not fail to have a great many interesting things on hand.
   Not that I or any of the painters with whom I’m more especially friendly will exhibit with the others, but an open exhibition will probably be staged alongside the official one at that time. Now here, for instance, at this moment, I have 6 paintings of blossoming fruit trees. And the one I brought home today would possibly appeal to you — it’s a dug-over patch of ground in an orchard, a wicker fence and two peach trees in full bloom, pink against a sparkling blue sky with white clouds and in sunshine. You may well see it, since I’ve decided to send this one to Jet Mauve. I’ve written on it Souvenir de Mauve Vincent & Theo7 Now I know very well that I could also have found such a subject elsewhere, but when I think that many painters will do the same I reckon it by no means immaterial to work in nature which, although it’s the same as at home in subject and fact, is undoubtedly much richer and more colourful.
   Furthermore, the people here are picturesque too, and whereas at home a beggar looks much like a spectre, here he becomes a caricature. Since, as you’ll see when you read Zola and Guy de Maupassant, people definitely want — in art — something very rich and something very cheerful — even though that same Zola and Maupassant have said the most heart-rending things that have perhaps ever been said — the same movement is also beginning to become the rule in painting. For example I can imagine that a painter of today might make something like one finds described in the book by Pierre Loti, Le mariage de Loti, where nature in Otaheite is described. A book that I can really recommend to you. You understand that the countryside of the south can’t exactly be painted with the palette of Mauve, say, who belongs in the north and is and always will be the master of grey. But today’s palette is definitely colourful — sky blue, pink, orange, vermilion, brilliant yellow, bright green, bright wine red, violet. 
    But by intensifying all the colours one again achieves calm and harmony. And something happens like with the Wagner music which, performed by a large orchestra, is no less intimate for that. Only people prefer sunny and colourful effects, and nothing stops me from thinking sometimes that later on many painters will go and work in tropical countries. You can get an idea of the change in painting if you think, say, of the colourful Japanese pictures that one sees everywhere, landscapes and figures. Theo and I have hundreds of these Japanese prints. You see I’m writing to you only about the work today, and I must close, and don’t know whether I’ll be able to write any more to add to it. Best wishes to you and Ma, and thanks for your letters. Vincent For my part I must also wish you a happy birthday11 — since I’d like to give you something of my work that you’ll like I’ll set aside a little study of a book and a flower12 for you — in a large format with a whole mass of books with pink, yellow, green covers and fiery red — my painting Parisian novels was the same subject. Theo will bring this for you — I also have a study for Jet Mauve. My dear old Bernard, Thanks for your kind letter and the croquis of your decoration included with it, which I find really amusing. I sometimes regret that I can’t decide to work more at home and from the imagination. Certainly — imagination is a capacity that must be developed, and only that enables us to create a more exalting and consoling nature than what just a glance at reality (which we perceive changing, passing quickly like lightning) allows us to perceive. A starry sky, for example, well — it’s a thing that I’d like to try to do, just as in the daytime I’ll try to paint a green meadow studded with dandelions. But how to arrive at that unless I decide to work at home and from the imagination? This, then, to criticize myself and to praise you. At present I’m busy with the fruit trees in blossom: pink peach trees, yellow-white pear trees.
   I follow no system of brushwork at all; I hit the canvas with irregular strokes which I leave as they are, impastos, uncovered spots of canvas — corners here and there left inevitably unfinished — reworkings, roughnesses; well, I’m inclined to think that the result is sufficiently worrying and annoying not to please people with preconceived ideas about technique. Here’s a croquis, by the way, the entrance to a Provençal orchard with its yellow reed fences, with its shelter (against the mistral), black cypresses, with its typical vegetables of various greens, yellow lettuces, onions and garlic and emerald leeks. While always working directly on the spot, I try to capture the essence in the drawing — then I fill the spaces demarcated by the outlines (expressed or not) but felt in every case, likewise with simplified tints, in the sense that everything 
    
   that will be earth will share the same purplish tint, that the whole sky will have a blue tonality, that the greenery will either be blue greens or yellow greens, deliberately exaggerating the yellow or blue values in that case. Anyway, my dear pal, no trompe l’oeil in any case. As for going to visit Aix, Marseille, Tangier, no fear; if I were to go there, though, it would be in search of cheaper lodgings, &c. Otherwise, I’m convinced that if I worked my whole life, couldn’t do as much as half of all that is characteristic of this town alone. By the way, have seen bullfights in the arenas, or rather, simulated fights, seeing that the bulls were numerous but nobody was fighting them. But the crowd was magnificent, great multicoloured crowds. One on top of the other on 2, 3 tiers, with the effect of sun and shade and the shadow cast by the immense circle. Wish you bon voyage5 — handshake in thought, your friend Vincent My dear Russell, I ought to have answered your letter ever so long ago1 but working pretty hard every day, at night I feel so often too weary to write. As it rains to day I avail myself of the opportunity. Last Sunday I have met Macknight and a Danish painter and I intend to go and see him at Fontvieille next Monday. I feel sure I’ll prefer him as an artist to what he is as an art critic, his views as such being so narrow that they make me smile.  I heartily hope for you that you will be able to leave Paris for good soon3 and no doubt leaving Paris will do you a world of good in all respects. As for me I remain enraptured with the scenery here, am working at a series of blooming orchards. And unvoluntarily thought often of you because you did the same in Sicily. I wished you would one day or another, when I shall send over some work to Paris, exchange a Sicilian study with me – in case you should have one to spare.
    You know I thought and think such a deal of those of yours. I don’t gainsay that your portraits are more serious and higher art but I think it meritory in you and a rare quality that together with a perfection as appeared to me the Fabian and Macknight portraits, you are at the same time able to give a Scherzo, the adagio con espressione, the gay note in one word, together with more manly conceptions of a higher order. And I so heartily hope that you will continue to give us simultanément both the grave and elaborate works and those aforesaid scherzos. Then let them say if they like that you are not always serious or that you have done work of a lighter sort. So much the worse for the critics and the better for you. I have heard nothing of our friend Mr Reid. I felt rather anxious on his account because I feel sure that he was on a false track. My brother has received a letter of him but pretty unsatisfactory.
    I was very much taken in bya  him during the first 6 weeks or 2 months9 but after that period he was in pecuniary difficulties and in the same acted in a way that made on me the impression that he had lost his wits.  Which I still think was the case and consequently he’s not responsable even if his doings then were pretty unfair. He is very nervous – as we all are – and can’t help being so. He is prompted to act in his crisis of nerves to make money – – – whilst painters would make pictures  So much to say that I consider the dealer stronger in him than THE ARTIST though there be a battle in his conscience concerning this – of the which battle I do not yet know the result. So much – for your informationb – as I had the pleasure of introducing him to you, feel bound to warn you with the same sympathy however for him because I found him artistic in pleading the Monticelli cause. In the which I took and take my part. Witnessing the very scenery which inspired Monticelli I maintain this artists rights to public though too late appreciation. 
    Surely Monticelli gives us not, neither pretends to give us, local colour or even local truth. But gives us something passionate and eternal – the rich coulour and rich sun of the glorious south in a true colourists way parralel with Delacroix’ conception of the south. Viz. that the south be represented now by contraste simultané of colours12 and their derivations and harmonies, and not by forms or lines in themselves as the ancient artists did formerly, by pure form greeks and Michelangelo, or by pure line or delineation Raphael, Mantegna, Venetian primitifs. (Botticelli, Cimabue, Giotto, Bellini.) Contrariwise the thing undertaken by P. Veronese and Titian – Colour. The thing undertaken by Velázquez and Goya to be continued and – more fully or rather more universally done by the more universal knowledge we have and possess of the colours of the prism and their proprieties.  Hoping to write to you again and to hear of you pretty soon, Yours very truly, Vincent My dear old Bernard, Many thanks for sending your sonnets. For form and sonority I very much like the first one, ‘Under the sleeping canopies of the gigantic trees’. Now for idea and sentiment it’s perhaps the last one that I prefer: ‘For hope has poured its neurosis into my breast’, but it seems to me that what you want to evoke isn’t stated clearly enough: the certainty that we seem to have and which anyway we can prove, of nothingness, of emptiness, of the treachery of desirable, good or beautiful things, and despite this knowledge we forever allow ourselves to be deceived by the spell that external life, things outside ourselves, cast over our 6 senses, as though we knew nothing, and especially not the difference between objective and subjective. And fortunately for us, in that way we remain ignorant and hopeful. Now I also like ‘In winter, have neither a sou nor a flower’, and Contempt. Corner of a chapel and Drawing by Albrecht Dürer I find less clear; for example, precisely which drawing by Albrecht Dürer is it? But excellent passages in it nevertheless. ‘Having come from the blue plains, Made pale by the long miles’ is a jolly good rendering of the landscapes bristling with blue rocks between which the roads wind in the backgrounds of Cranach and Van Eyck. Twisted on his cross in a spiral is a very, very good rendering of the exaggerated thinness of the mystical Christs; why not add to it that the anguished expression of the martyr is like the eye of a broken-hearted cab horse? That way it would be more utterly Parisian, where you see looks like that, either in the pensioners of the little carriages, or in poets and artists. 
   But all in all it’s not as good as your painting yet. Never mind. It’ll come, and you must certainly continue doing sonnets. There are so many people, especially among our pals, who imagine that words are nothing. On the contrary, don’t you think, it’s as interesting and as difficult to say a thing well as to paint a thing. There’s the art of lines and colours, but there’s the art of words that will last just the same.  Here’s a new orchard, quite simple in composition; a white tree, a small green tree, a square corner of greenery — a lilac field, an orange roof, a big blue sky. Have nine orchards on the go; one white, one pink, one almost red pink, one white and blue, one pink and grey, one green and pink. I worked one to death yesterday, of a cherry tree against blue sky, the young shoots of the leaves were orange and gold, the clusters of flowers white. That, against the blue green of the sky, was darned glorious. Unfortunately there’s rain today, which prevents me from going back on the attack. 
   Saw a brothel here on Sunday (not to mention the other days), a large room tinged with a bluish limewash — like a village school — a good fifty or so red soldiers and black civilians, with faces of a magnificent yellow or orange (what tones in the faces down here), the women in sky-blue, in vermilion, everything that’s of the purest and gaudiest. All of it in yellow light. Far less gloomy than the establishments of the same kind in Paris. Spleen isn’t in the air down here. At present I’m still keeping very quiet and very calm, because first I have to get over a stomach ailment of which I’m the happy owner, but afterwards I’ll have to make a lot of noise, because I aspire to share the renown of the immortal Tartarin de Tarascon. It interested me enormously that you intend spending your time in Algeria. That’s perfect, and a hell of a long way from being a misfortune. Truly, I congratulate you on it. We’ll see each other in Marseille in any case.  You’ll find that you’ll enjoy seeing the blue down here, and feeling the sun. I now have a terrace for a studio.
   I really intend to go and do seascapes too, in Marseille, and I don’t pine here for the grey sea of the north. If you see Gauguin, greet him warmly for me; I must write to him in a moment. My dear old Bernard, don’t despair and above all, don’t be downhearted, my good fellow, because with your talent and your stay in Algeria, you’ll be a hell of a good artist. True — you’ll be a southerner too. If I have a piece of advice to give you, it’s to build yourself up by eating healthy and simple things for a year beforehand, yes. Starting now. Because it’s better not to come here with a ruined stomach or spoiled blood. That was the case with me, and although I’m recovering, I’m recovering slowly, and I regret not having been a little more prudent beforehand. But who can do anything in a bloody winter like this one, because it was a preternatural winter. So see that your blood’s good beforehand; with the bad food here it’s difficult to regain that, but once you’re healthy it’s less difficult to stay that way than in Paris.  Write to me soon, still same address, Restaurant Carrel, Arles. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Bernard, I’ve just received your last letter – you’re quite right to see that those negresses1 were heart-rending – you’re quite right not to find it innocent. I’ve just read a book — not beautiful and not well written, by the way — on the Marquesas Islands, but very heart-rending in its description of the extermination of an entire tribe of natives — cannibals in the sense that let’s say an individual was eaten once a month, and what of that? The whites, very Christian, etc., to put an end to this barbarity? really not very savage, could think of nothing better than to exterminate both the tribe of cannibal natives and the tribe with which the former was at war (in order to obtain the requisite edible prisoners of war on both sides). Then the two islands were annexed, and did they become dismal!!! Those tattooed races, those negroes, those Indians, everything, everything, everything disappears or is corrupted. And the frightful white man, with his bottle of alcohol, his wallet and his pox, when will we have seen enough of him! The frightful white man, with his hypocrisy, his greed and his sterility! And those savages were so gentle and so loving. 
   Ah, you do darned well to think of Gauguin – they’re high poetry, his negresses — and everything his hand makes has a sweet, heart-rending, astonishing character. People don’t understand him yet, and he suffers greatly from not selling, like other true poets. My dear pal, I would have written to you sooner, only have had quite a few things on my hands; I’ve sent a first batch of studies to my brother is one, I’ve had trouble with my health is two, and three is that I’ve rented a house painted yellow outside, whitewashed inside, in the full sun (4 rooms). With all that, new studies on the go. And in the evening I was often too numbed to write. That’s why my reply was delayed. Listen, the sonnet about the women of the boulevard has some good things, but it isn’t there yet — the end’s banal. A ‘sublime’ woman, I don’t know what you mean by that, nor do you in this case. Then  ‘Hunting among the clan of old and young Those whom she’ll take to bed late at night’. Something like that — it’s not characteristic, because 
   the women of our boulevard — le petit6 — usually sleep alone at night because they screw 5 or 6 times during the day or the evening and — late at night it’s that honourable carnivore, their pimp, who comes to collect them and take them home, yes, but he doesn’t sleep with them (only rarely). The worn-out and haggard woman usually goes to bed alone, and sleeps a leaden sleep. But with two or 3 lines redone, it’ll be there. What have you painted now? I myself have done a still life with — a coffee pot in blue enamelled iron — a royal blue cup and saucer, a milk jug with pale cobalt and white checks, a cup with orange and blue designs on a white background, a blue majolica jug with green, brown, pink flowers and foliage, all of it on a blue tablecloth against a yellow background. With these pieces of crockery, 2 oranges and three lemons. It’s thus a variation of blues enlivened by a series of yellows ranging all the way to orange. Then I have another still life, some lemons in a basket against a yellow background.
   Then a view of Arles — of the town you see only a few red roofs and a tower, the rest’s hidden by the foliage of fig-trees, &c. All that far off in the background and a narrow strip of blue sky above. The town is surrounded by vast meadows decked with innumerable buttercups — a yellow sea. These meadows are intersected in the foreground by a ditch full of purple irises. They cut the grass while I was painting, so it’s only a study and not a finished painting, which I intended to make of it. But what a subject — eh — that sea of yellow flowers with a line of purple irises, and in the background the neat little town of pretty women. Then two studies of roadsides — afterwards — done out in the mistral. If you weren’t expecting my reply right away I’d make croquis. Courage, good luck, handshake. I’m worn out this evening. I’ll write to you again one of these days, more at my ease. Vincent P.S. The croquis of the woman in the last letter but one is really pretty. 

My address:


Place Lamartine 2


Arles.


 My dear friend Koning, Learning from Theo that you’re going back to Holland, I wanted to drop you a line to say farewell. You must have seen the Impressionists at Durand-Ruel. You’ll have a great deal to tell the fellows in Holland about what you saw in Paris. I’m very glad that you’re in good health, as Theo wrote to me. We can hardly do without it for the work. Tomorrow I’m going to Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer just to see a blue sea and a blue sky. And just to get an idea of the figures. Because I think that I’ll suddenly make a furious attack on the figure, around which I’m currently circling as if I didn’t care about it, but all the same that’s actually exactly my goal. 
   I’m beginning to get quite tanned. The people here are tanned by the sun, yellow and orange in colour, and sometimes red ochre. It surprised me somewhat not to have heard whether our exchange went ahead, I hope so. I’ve just made a drawing even larger than the first two. Of a group of pines on a rock, seen from a hill. Behind that foreground a vista of meadows, a road with poplars and, right in the distance, the town. The trees very dark against the sunlit meadow. Perhaps you’ll get a chance to see this drawing. I did it with very thick reed pens on thin Whatman, and used a quill pen for the finer lines in the distance. 
   I can recommend that to you, because the lines with a quill pen are more in the nature of those with a reed. I’m glad you’ve seen my first consignment from here, I hope there’ll be a few seascapes in the next, and then — — — — — the figure. That’s what I’m chiefly after, only until now walking and working outdoors seemed to me better for my health, and I didn’t want to start a figure until I felt a little stronger. Well, old chap, I’ll often think about our being together in Paris, and I’m sure we’ll hear from you when you’re back in Holland. It’s very good that you’re returning hale and hearty. 
   If you should come back next year, come and have a look around here too. I wish you could see the colour here. I’m very curious about the region I’ll see tomorrow, and about the sea. At present there are bullfights almost every Sunday. Last Sunday a bull jumped over the barrier and he jumped up against the terraces where the spectators were sitting, but the arenas here are so high that it can do no harm. Meanwhile, in a village near here a bull jumped out of the enclosure, made its way through the spectators and injured several of them, then ran through the village. At the end of the village, which is built on a rock, there’s an enormously high, steep cliff. In its rage the bull just kept running and — plunged to its death below. A hearty handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard, More and more it seems to me that the paintings that ought to be made, the paintings that are necessary, indispensable for painting today to be fully itself and to rise to a level equivalent to the serene peaks achieved by the Greek sculptors, the German musicians, the French writers of novels, exceed the power of an isolated individual, and will therefore probably be created by groups of men combining to carry out a shared idea. One has a superb orchestration of colours3 and lacks ideas. The other overflows with new, harrowing or charming conceptions, but is unable to express them in a way that’s sufficiently sonorous, given the timidity of a limited palette.  Very good reason to regret the lack of an esprit de corps among artists, who criticize each other, persecute each other, while fortunately not succeeding in cancelling each other out. You’ll say that this whole argument is a banality. So be it — but the thing itself — the existence of a Renaissance — that fact is certainly not a banality. 
   A technical question. Do give me your opinion in next letter. I’m going to put the black and the white boldly on my palette just the way the colourman sells them to us, and use them as they are. When — and note that I’m talking about the simplification of colour in the Japanese manner — when I see in a green park with pink paths a gentleman who’s dressed in black, and a justice of the peace by profession (the Arab Jew in Daudet’s Tartarin calls this honourable official shustish of the beace), who’s reading L’Intransigeant. Above him and the park a sky of a simple cobalt. Then why not paint the said shustish of the beace with simple bone black and L’Intransigeant with simple, very harsh white? Because the Japanese disregards reflection, placing his solid tints one beside the other — characteristic lines naively marking off movements or shapes. In another category of ideas, when you compose a colour motif expressing, for example, a yellow evening sky — 
   The harsh, hard white of a white wall against the sky can be expressed, at a pinch and in a strange way, by harsh white and by that same white softened by a neutral tone. Because the sky itself colours it with a delicate lilac hue.  just as pleasing to the eye as that of the blue with the orange.  To take a more entertaining subject, let’s imagine a woman dressed in a black and white checked dress, in the same primitive landscape of a blue sky and an orange earth — that would be quite amusing to see, I imagine. In fact, in Arles they often do wear white and black checks. In short, black and white are colours too, or rather, in many cases may be considered colours, since their simultaneous contrast is as sharp as that of green and red, for example. 
   The Japanese use it too, by the way — they express a young girl’s matt and pale complexion, and its sharp contrast with her black hair wonderfully well with white paper and 4 strokes of the pen. Not to mention their black thorn-bushes, studded with a thousand white flowers. I’ve finally seen the Mediterranean, which you’ll probably cross before me. Spent a week in Saintes-Maries, and to get there crossed the Camargue in a diligence, with vineyards, heaths, fields as flat as Holland. There, at Saintes-Maries, there were girls who made one think of Cimabue and Giotto: slim, straight, a little sad and mystical. On the completely flat, sandy beach, little green, red, blue boats, so pretty in shape and colour that one thought of flowers; one man boards them, these boats hardly go on the high sea — they dash off when there’s no wind and come back to land if there’s a bit too much. It appears that Gauguin is still ill. I’m quite curious to know what you’ve done lately; I’m still doing landscapes, croquis enclosed. I’d very much like to see Africa too, but I hardly make any firm plans for the future, it will depend on circumstances. What I’d like to know is the effect of a more intense blue in the sky. Fromentin and Gérôme11 see the earth in the south as colourless, and a whole lot of people saw it that way. My God, yes, if you take dry sand in your hand and if you look at it closely. Water, too, air, too, considered this way, are colourless. No blue without yellow and without orange, and if you do blue, then do yellow and orange as well, surely. Ah well, you’ll tell me that I write you nothing but banalities. Handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
    
    
    
    My dear sister, Many thanks for your letter, which I’d been looking forward to; I daren’t give way to my desire to write to you often or to encourage this on your part. All this correspondence doesn’t always help to keep us, who are of a nervous disposition, strong in cases of possible immersions in melancholy of the kind you refer to in your letter and which I myself have too every now and then. A friend of mine asserted that the best treatment for all ills is to treat them with the most profound contempt. The remedy for the immersions you refer to doesn’t, as far as I know, grow among the usual medicinal herbs. Nonetheless I drink large quantities of bad coffee in such cases, not because this is very good for already bad teeth but because my strong powers of imagination in this respect enable me to have a religious faith — worthy of an idolater, Christian or anthropophagus — in the cheering effect of the aforementioned fluid. Fortunately for my fellow creatures I have so far carefully refrained from recommending this or similar remedies to them as being efficacious. The sun here, that is something else, and if for a while one just drinks wine that at least in part has been pressed from grapes. I assure you that the people in our country are as blind as moles and criminally stupid because they don’t make more effort to go to the Indies or somewhere else where the sun shines. It’s not good to know only one thing; it stultifies one. One shouldn’t rest until one also knows the opposite. What you say about extenuating circumstances, that sadly they don’t take away the fact of having done something wrong or spoiled something, is very true. Well, just think of our national history, rise and fall of the Dutch republic, and you’ll understand what I mean, we mustn’t give way too much to the extenuating circumstance of not being able &c., it’s less Christian (in the sense in which people water it down these days), but it’s better for us and perhaps even for others. And energy generates energy, and conversely paralysis paralyzes others. We’re now living here in a world of painting where it’s unspeakably paralyzed and wretched. The exhibitions, the shops for paintings, everything, everything is occupied by people who all intercept money. And you mustn’t think that I’m imagining this. People pay a lot for the work when the painter himself is dead. 
   And people always disparage living painters by pointing unanswerably to the work of those who are no longer with us. I know that we can’t do anything to change this. For the sake of peace one must therefore resign oneself to it, or have some sort of patronage or captivate a rich woman or something, otherwise one can’t work. Everything one hopes for in terms of independence through one’s work, of influence on others, absolutely nothing comes of it. And yet it’s something of a pleasure to make a painting, and yet there are 20 or so painters here right now, all of them having more debts than money &c., all of them with a way of life something like that of curs, who will perhaps mean more than the whole official exhibition in so far as the future manner of working is concerned. The principal characteristic of a painter, I imagine, is to paint really well; those who can paint, those who can do it best, are the germs of something that will continue to exist for a long time, just as long as there are eyes that enjoy something that is singularly beautiful. Well I constantly regret that one can’t make oneself richer by working harder — on the contrary. If one actually could do that, one would be able to accomplish much more, be able to associate with others, and what not. For now everyone is bound by his opportunity to earn his living, and one is far from free, exactly. You talk about ‘whether I had submitted something to Arti’2 — certainly not – only Theo sent Mr Tersteeg a consignment of paintings by Impressionists and there was one of mine in it. However, all that transpired was that neither Tersteeg nor the artists, so Theo heard, had found anything in it. Well that’s very understandable because it’s always the same, people have heard of the Impressionists, they have great expectations of them... and when they see them for the first time they’re bitterly, bitterly disappointed and find them careless, ugly, badly painted, badly drawn, bad in colour, everything that’s miserable. That was my first impression, too, when I came to Paris with the ideas of Mauve and Israëls and other clever painters. And when there’s an exhibition in Paris of Impressionists alone, I believe a host of visitors come back from it bitterly disappointed and even indignant, in just the same mood as the good Hollanders were at the time when, coming out of church, they attended a lecture by Domela Nieuwenhuis or other socialists a moment later. And yet — you know — in the space of 10 or 15 years that whole edifice of a national religion fell and — the socialists are still there and will be there for a long time, although neither you nor I belong very much to either persuasion. 
   Well art — official art — and its education, management, organization, is as stultified and mouldering as the religion we see falling — and it won’t last, however many exhibitions, studios, schools &c. there may be, won’t last any more than tulip mania. But this doesn’t concern us, we’re neither founders of something new nor called upon to be preservers of something old. But this remains — a painter is someone who paints, just as a genuine flower lover is someone who loves plants and grows them himself, and not the tulip dealer. And so those 20 or so painters whom people call Impressionists, although a few of them have become fairly rich and fairly big men in the world — all the same, the majority of them are poor souls who live in coffee houses, lodge in cheap inns, live from one day to the next. But — in one day all those 20 whom I mentioned to you paint everything they set eyes on, and better than many a great man who has a big reputation in the art world. I say this to get you to understand what sort of tie binds me to the French painters whom people call the Impressionists — that I know many of them personally and like them. And furthermore that in my own technique I have the same ideas concerning colour, which even I was thinking about when I was still in Holland. Cornflowers with white chrysanthemums and a few marigolds. There you have a motif in blue and orange. Heliotrope and yellow roses, motif in lilac and yellow. Poppies or red geraniums in bold green leaves, motif in red and green. There you have basics that one can subdivide further, can elaborate, but enough to show you without a painting that there are colours that make each other shine, that make a couple, complete each other like man and wife. Explaining the whole theory to you would take quite a lot of writing, but still, it could be done. 
   Clothes, wallpaper, what couldn’t one make a good deal nicer by taking account of the laws of colour. You understand that Israëls and Mauve, who didn’t use whole colours, who always worked in grey, do not, with the greatest respect and love, satisfy the present-day longing for colour. Something else: someone who can really play the violin or piano is, it seems to me, a mightily entertaining person. He picks up his violin and starts to play, and a whole gathering enjoys it all evening long. A painter has to be able to do that too. And this sometimes gives me pleasure, to work outside when someone’s looking on. One is in the wheat, say. Well then, in the space of a few hours one has to be able to paint that wheatfield and the sky above it and the prospect in the distance. Anyone who watches that will certainly keep his mouth shut afterwards about the clumsiness of the Impressionists and their bad painting, you see. But nowadays we seldom have acquaintances who are interested enough to come along now and again. But when they do, then they’re sometimes won over for good. Now contrast that with the fellows who need a studio, months and months, and I don’t know what else to make something — only too often rather dull, after all that. Can’t you understand then that there’s something in the new manner? And I also want this — I want to be able to paint a portrait in a morning or an afternoon, and I’ve done that now and again, as a matter of fact. This work definitely doesn’t alter the fact that one can work longer on other paintings. Yesterday I sent you by post a drawing that’s the first scratch for quite a large painting. But isn’t it curious that, as I said to you just then, there are at least a score of fellows who in an hour or so can paint a portrait with character in it — people hardly ever ask for one — 20 or so fellows who can do whatever landscape you please, at whatever hour of the day, with whatever colour effect you please, on the spot, without hesitation — nobody looks on, they always work alone. If only everyone knew this, though — but you see the circumstances are so little known. Only I imagine that a generation later or in one of the later generations — this working decisively without hesitation, measuring correctly in an instant, skilful mixing of the colour, drawing at lightning speed — a generation will come that will do this not as we do now, alone, unloved, but with a public that will like it both for portraits of people and for portraits of landscapes or interiors. 
   However, I’m writing to you much too much about painting, only by doing so I wanted to get you to understand that it’s rather important that Theo has got things to the point that in the firm he manages there’s always an exhibition of Impressionists nowadays. Next year will be rather important. Just as the French are undeniably the masters in literature, so it is in painting too, in modern art history there are names like Delacroix, Millet, Corot, Courbet, Daumier, who dominate everything that was produced in other countries. Yet the clique of painters who currently stand at the head of the official art world is resting on the laurels won by those earlier men, and is in itself of much lesser calibre. So they can’t do much at the forthcoming World Exhibition to help French art retain that importance it’s had until now. Next year the attention, not of the public — who naturally look at everything without wondering about the history — but the attention of those who are well informed, will be attracted by the retrospective exhibition of the paintings of the great men who are already dead, and by the Impressionists. Even that won’t immediately change the circumstances in which the latter find themselves, but it will at least help to disseminate the ideas and generate a bit more enthusiasm. The dull schoolmasters who are now on the selection committee for the Salon won’t even admit the Impressionists though. The latter won’t want that anyway, though, and will exhibit on their own. When you realize that I want to have at least 50 or so paintings by then, you’ll perhaps see that I, who don’t exhibit, will nevertheless slowly and steadily play my part in a battle of which one can at least say this, that if one takes part in it, one doesn’t have to fear a prize or medal like a good boy. They’re ambitious here too, but still there’s a difference, and many here are beginning to understand how ridiculous it is to make oneself dependent on the opinion of others about what one does. I detest writing about myself and I don’t know why I do it. Perhaps to give you answers to your questions. You see what I’ve found, my work, and you also see what I haven’t found, everything else that’s part of life. And the future? Either become wholly abstracted from whatever isn’t the work or... I dare not elaborate on that ‘or’ because becoming nothing but a work machine, unfit for and indifferent to all the rest, could be either better or worse than that average. I could quite easily resign myself to that average, and for the time being the fact is I’m still in exactly the same junk heap as ever. 
   By the way, talking of junk. It might still be worth while salvaging anything any good from the junk of mine which, so Theo says, is still somewhere in an attic in Breda, but I daren’t ask it of you and perhaps it’s been lost, so don’t worry about it. But this is the question. You know Theo brought a whole batch of woodcuts with him last year? Even so, a few of the best portfolios are missing and the rest isn’t as good precisely because it’s no longer complete. Obviously woodcuts from illustrated magazines get rarer and rarer as the volumes get older. Enough, this junk doesn’t leave me completely indifferent; for instance, there’s a copy of Gavarni’s Mascarade humaine, a book Anatomy for artists, in short, a few things that are actually much too good to lose. I consider them as lost in advance, though; anything that still turns up is pure gain. I didn’t know when I left that it would be for good like this. Because the work wasn’t going badly in Nuenen and it was only a matter of going on with it. I still miss my models who were made for me and whom I still adore; if only I had them here now — I’m sure my 50 paintings would hit the mark. Do you understand that I’m not angry with the human race because they think I’m this or that — I freely admit in advance that they’re absolutely right, but it saddens me that I don’t have enough power to get what I want to pose for me, where I want and for as long or as short as I want. The problem I have to bring to an end, to overcome, lies there and not in the technical difficulty. And today I’m a landscape painter whereas I’m actually more suited to portraits. So it wouldn’t surprise me much if I were to change style again sometime. A painter — Chaplin — who paints the portraits of the most beautiful women in Paris mightily well, ladies in boudoirs dressed or undressed, has painted powerful landscapes and herds of pigs on the moors. What I’m saying is one has to do what lies to hand and hold fast to one’s technique. If you were within my reach you would, I fear, have to get down to painting. There are Parisian ladies among the Impressionists, at least one really good — even 2 good ones. And when I think how the new manner could help to put the women who are incapable of precision, who feel musically, on the right track, then I sometimes regret getting older and uglier than is in my interest. It’s very good of Theo to have invited you to come to Paris — I don’t know what sort of impression it would make on you. The first time I saw it I felt above all the miseries that one cannot wave away, any more than the smell of sickness in the hospital, however clean it may be kept. And that stayed with me later, but later I gained an understanding of how it’s a hotbed of ideas, and how the people try to get everything out of life that could possibly be in it. Other cities shrink by comparison, and it seems as big as the sea. But one always leaves a whole piece of life behind there. And this is certain, nothing is fresh there. That’s why, when one comes from there, one finds a mass of things elsewhere excellent. 
   I’m very glad that you’ve recovered your health; one does everything unwittingly and wrongly, without understanding it oneself, when one’s ill. You would not, I think, find the sun here unpleasant at all; I feel fine working outside in the hottest part of the day. It’s a dry, clean heat. The colour here is actually very fine; when the vegetation is fresh it’s a rich green the like of which we seldom see in the north, calm. When it gets scorched and dusty it doesn’t become ugly, but then a landscape takes on tones of gold of every shade, green-gold, yellow-gold, red-gold, ditto bronze, copper, in short from lemon yellow to the dull yellow colour of, say, a pile of threshed grain. That with the blue — from the deepest royal blue in the water to that of forget-me-nots. Cobalt above all, bright clear blue — green-blue and violet-blue. Naturally this induces orange — a face tanned by the sun looks orange; further, because of all the yellow, the violet really speaks — a wicker fence or grey thatched roof or a ploughed field look much more violet than at home. Further, as you already suspect, the people here are often handsome. In a word, I believe that life here is rather more rewarding than in many other places. Only it seems to me that the people are getting a little slack here, slipping a little too much onto the downward slope of carelessness, indifference, whereas if they were more energetic the land would probably yield more. I haven’t read much lately, except Madame Chrysanthème by Pierre Loti. Also L’abbé Constantin by Ohnet, terribly sweet and heavenly, so that even his Mâitre de forges, already tending that way, becomes even more suspect. Sometimes, out of ravenous hunger, I even read the newspaper here with fury, but don’t take this to mean that I have a need to read. On the contrary, in fact, because I prefer to look at things myself. But it’s simply become a habit to read for a few hours in the evening, so one can’t help feeling that one’s missing something, but you can tell that this isn’t irksome from the fact that what one sees is interesting. I spent a week by the Mediterranean, you would think it beautiful. What strikes me here and what makes painting here attractive to me is the clarity of the air, you can’t know what that is because it’s precisely what we don’t have at home — but at an hour’s distance one can make out the colour of things, the grey-green of olive trees and the grass green of the meadow, for instance, and the pink-lilac of ploughed land; at home we see a vague grey line on the horizon; here the line is sharp and the shape recognizable from far, far away. This gives an idea of space and air. 
   Since I’m now so occupied with myself, I’d also like to see if I can’t make my own portrait in writing. First I start by saying that to my mind the same person supplies material for very diverse portraits. Here’s an impression of mine, which is the result of a portrait that I painted in the mirror, and which Theo has: a pink-grey face with green eyes, ash-coloured hair, wrinkles in forehead and around the mouth, stiffly wooden, a very red beard, quite unkempt and sad, but the lips are full, a blue smock of coarse linen, and a palette with lemon yellow, vermilion, Veronese green, cobalt blue, in short all the colours, except of the orange beard, on the palette, the only whole colours, though. The figure against a grey-white wall. You’ll say that this is something like, say, the face of — death — in Van Eeden’s book16 or some such thing – very well, but anyway isn’t a figure like this — and it isn’t easy to paint oneself — in any event something different from a photograph? And you see — this is what Impressionism has — to my mind — over the rest, it isn’t banal, and one seeks a deeper likeness than that of the photographer. I look different nowadays, in so far as I no longer have either hair or beard, both being always shaved off close; further, my complexion has changed from green-grey pink to grey-orange, and I have a white suit instead of a blue one, and am always dusty, always more laden like a porcupine with sticks, easel, canvas, and other merchandise. Only the green eyes have remained the same, but another colour in the portrait, naturally, is a yellow straw hat like a grass-mower17 — and a very black pipe. I live in a little yellow house with green door and shutters, whitewashed inside — on the white walls — very brightly coloured Japanese drawings18 — red tiles on the floor — the house in the full sun — and a bright blue sky above it and — the shadow in the middle of the day much shorter than at home. Anyway — but can’t you understand that one can paint something like that with a few strokes, but at the same time can’t you understand that some people say ‘it looks too strange’, not to mention the ones who find it nothing or abominable? If it just looks like it, but looks different from the work of the pious photographer with his black shadows — it should be done for that reason alone. I really don’t like Mr Vosmaer at all, and am callous enough not to care much about the man’s exchange of the temporary for the eternal. It’s a very good thing that you and Ma have acquired a garden, with cats, tomcats, sparrows and flies, rather than have an extra flight of stairs. I could never get used to climbing the stairs in Paris, and was always dizzy in a dreadful nightmare that has left me here, but recurred regularly there. Were I not to put this letter in the post I would certainly tear it up if I read it over first — so I won’t read it over and I doubt the legibility, I don’t always have time to write. I don’t think there’s anything in this letter and can’t understand how I managed to make it so long. Thank Ma for her letter. A long time ago I meant you to have a painted study, and you shall get it. I’m afraid that by post, even if I pay the postage, they’ll make you pay excess postage, like the flowers from Menton, and this is even bigger — but Theo will certainly send you one, if I don’t think about it, ask him for it. Embracing you and Ma in thought. Your loving Vincent Theo works for all the Impressionists, he’s done something for and sold for all of them, and will certainly go on doing so. But just these few things that I write to you about the matter will show you how he’s something very different from the run of dealers, who care nothing for the painters. Was there enough postage on the drawing? Write and tell me that, because I ought to know. My dear Russell For ever so long I have been wanting to write to you — but then the work has so taken me up. We have harvest time here at present and I am always in the fields. And when I sit down to write I am so abstracteda by recollections of what I have seen that I leave the letter. For instance at the present occasion I was writing to you and going to say something about Arles as it is — and as it was in the old days of Boccaccio. Well, instead of continuing the letter I began to draw on the very paper the head of a dirty little girl I saw this afternoon whilst I was painting a view of the river with a greenish yellow sky. This dirty ‘mudlark’3 I thought yet had a vague florentine sort of figure like the heads in the Monticelli pictures, and reasoning and drawing this wise I worked on the letter 
   I was writing to you. I enclose the slip of scribbling, that you may judge of my abstractions and forgive my not writing before as such. Do not however imagine I am painting old florentine scenery — no, I may dream of such — but I spend my time in painting and drawing landscapes or rather studies of colour. The actualb inhabitants of this country often remind me of the figures we see in Zola’s work. And Manet would like them as they are and the city as it is. Bernard is still in Brittany and I believe he’s working hard and doing well. Gauguin is in Brittany too but has again suffered of an attack of his liver complaint. I wished I were in the same place with him or he here with me. My brother has an exhibition of 10 new pictures by Claude Monet, his latest works, for instance a landscape with red sun set and a group of dark firtrees by the seaside. 
   The red sun casts an orange or blood red reflection on the blue green trees and the ground. I wished I could see them. How is your house in Brittany getting on5 — and have you been working in the country? I believe my brother has also another picture by Gauguin which is as I heard say very fine, two negro women talking. It is one of those he did at Martinique. Macknight told me he had seen a picture by Monticelli in Marseille, flower-piece. Very soon I intend sending over some studies to Paris and then you can, if you like, choose one for our exchange. I must hurry off this letter for I feel some more abstractions coming on and if I did not quickly fill up my paper I would again set to drawing and you would not have your letter. 
   I heard Rodin had a beautiful head at the Salon. I have been to the seaside for a week and very likely am going thither again soon. Flat shore sands — fine figures there like Cimabue – straight, stylish. Am working at a Sower.  The great field all violet, the sky and sun very yellow. It is a hard subject to treat. Please remember me very kindly to Mrs Russell9 — and in thought I heartily shake hands. Yours very truly, Vincent 
    Here’s croquis of a sower. Large field with clods of ploughed earth, mostly downright violet.  Field of ripe wheat in a yellow ochre tone with a little crimson. The chrome yellow 1 sky almost as bright as the sun itself, which is chrome yellow 1 with a little white, while the rest of the sky is chrome yellow 1 and 2 mixed, very yellow, then. The sower’s smock is blue, and his trousers white. Square no. 25 canvas. There are many repetitions of yellow in the earth, neutral tones, resulting from the mixing of violet with yellow, but I could hardly give a damn about the veracity of the colour. Better to make naive almanac pictures — old country almanacs, where hail, snow, rain, fine weather are represented in an utterly primitive way. The way Anquetin got his Harvest so well. I don’t hide from you that I don’t detest the countryside — having been brought up there, snatches of memories from past times, yearnings for that infinite of which the Sower, the sheaf, are the symbols, still enchant me as before.
   But when will I do the starry sky, then, that painting that’s always on my mind? Alas, alas, it’s just as our excellent pal Cyprien says, in ‘En ménage’ by J. K. Huysmans: the most beautiful paintings are those one dreams of while smoking a pipe in one’s bed, but which one doesn’t make. But it’s a matter of attacking them nevertheless, however incompetent one may feel vis-à-vis the ineffable perfections of nature’s glorious splendours.  But how I’d like to see the study you did at the brothel. I reproach myself endlessly for not having done figures here yet.  You shove the feet of the easel in and then you push a 50-centimetre-long iron peg in beside them. You tie everything together with ropes; that way you can work in the wind. Here’s what I wanted to say about the white and the black. Let’s take the Sower. The painting is divided into two; one half is yellow, the top; the bottom is violet. Well, the white trousers rest the eye and distract it10 just when the excessive simultaneous contrast11 of yellow and violet would annoy it. That’s what I wanted to say. 
   I know a second lieutenant of Zouaves here called Milliet. I give him drawing lessons — with my perspective frame12 — and he’s beginning to make drawings – my word, I’ve seen a lot worse than that, and he’s eager to learn; has been to Tonkin, &c. He’s leaving for Africa in October. If you were in the Zouaves he’d take you with him and would guarantee you a wide margin of relative freedom to paint, provided you helped him a little with his own artistic schemes. Could this be of some use to you? If so, let me know as soon as possible.  One reason for working is that canvases are worth money. You’ll tell me that first of all this reason is very prosaic, then that you doubt that it’s true. But it’s true. A reason for not working is that in the meantime canvases and paints only cost us money. Drawings, though, don’t cost us much. Gauguin’s bored too in Pont-Aven; complains about isolation, like you. If you went to see him — but I have no idea if he’ll stay there, and am inclined to think that he intends to go to Paris. He said that he thought you would have come to Pont-Aven. My God, if all three of us were here! You’ll tell me it’s too far away. Fine, but in winter — because here one can work outside all year round. That’s my reason for loving this part of the world, not having to dread the cold so much, which by preventing my blood from circulating prevents me from thinking, from doing anything at all. You can judge that for yourself when you’re a soldier. Your melancholy will go away, which may darned well come from the fact that you have too little blood — or tainted blood, which I don’t think, however. It’s that bloody filthy Paris wine and the filthy fat of the steaks that do that to you — dear God, I had come to a state in which my own blood was no longer working at all, but literally not at all, as they say. But after 4 weeks down here it got moving again, but, my dear pal, at that same time I had an attack of melancholy like yours, from which I would have suffered as much as you were it not that I welcomed it with great pleasure as a sign that I was going to recover — which happened too.
   Instead of going back to Paris, then, stay out in the country, because you need strength to get through this ordeal of going to Africa properly. Now the more blood, and good blood, that you make yourself beforehand, the better, because over there in the heat it’s perhaps harder to produce it. Painting and fucking a lot aren’t compatible; it weakens the brain, and that’s what’s really damned annoying. The symbol of Saint Luke, the patron of painters, is, as you know, an ox; we must therefore be as patient as an ox16 if we wish to labour in the artistic field. But bulls are pretty glad not having to work in the filthy business of painting. But what I wanted to say is this. After the period of melancholy you’ll be stronger17 than before, your health will pick up — and you’ll find the surrounding nature so beautiful that you’ll have no other desire than to do painting. I believe that your poetry will also change, in the same way as in your painting. After some eccentric things you have succeeded in making some that have an Egyptian calm and a great simplicity. 


 
‘How short is the hour

That’s not Baudelaire, I don’t even know who it’s by, they’re the words of a song in Daudet’s Le Nabab, that’s where I took it from — but doesn’t it say the thing like a real Lady’s shrug of her shoulder?


 
We spend loving —


—
 It’s less than an instant —


—
 A little more than a dream — :


—
 Time takes away


—
 Our spell. 


 These last few days I read Pierre Loti’s Madame Chrysanthème; it provides interesting remarks about Japan. At the moment my brother has an exhibition of Claude Monet, I’d very much like to see them. Guy de Maupassant21, among others, had been there, and said that from now on he would often revisit boulevard Montmartre. I have to go and paint, so I’ll finish — I’ll probably write to you again before long. I beg a thousand pardons for not having put enough stamps on the letter; and yet I did stamp it at the post office and this isn’t the first time that it’s happened here, that when in doubt, and asking at the post office itself, I’ve been misled about the postage. You can’t imagine the carelessness, the nonchalance of the people here. Anyway, you’ll see that shortly with your own eyes in Africa. Thanks for your letter, I hope to write to you soon at a moment when I’m in less of a hurry. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Bernard, You do very well to read the Bible — I start there because I’ve always refrained from recommending it to you.  When reading your many quotations from Moses, from St Luke, &c., I can’t help saying to myself — well, well — that’s all he needed. There it is now, full-blown — — — — ... the artist’s neurosis. Because the study of Christ inevitably brings it on, especially in my case, where it’s complicated by the seasoning of innumerable pipes. The Bible — that’s Christ, because the Old Testament leads towards that summit; St Paul and the evangelists occupy the other slope of the holy mountain. How petty that story is! My God, are there only these Jews in the world, then? Who start out by declaring that everything that isn’t themselves is impure? The other peoples under the great sun over there — the Egyptians, the Indians, the Ethiopians, Babylon, Nineveh. Why didn’t they write their annals with the same care? Still, the study of it is beautiful, and anyway, to be able to read everything would be almost the equivalent of not being able to read at all. But the consolation of this so saddening Bible, which stirs up our despair and our indignation – thoroughly upsets us, completely outraged2 by its pettiness and its contagious folly – the consolation it contains, like a kernel inside a hard husk, a bitter pulp — is Christ. The figure of Christ has been painted — as I feel it — only by Delacroix and by Rembrandt And then Millet has painted Christ’s doctrine. The rest makes me smile a little — the rest of religious painting — from the religious point of view — not from the painting point of view. And the Italian primitives (Botticelli, say), the Flemish, German primitives (V. Eyck, and Cranach) They’re pagans, and only interest me for the same reason that the Greeks do, and Velázquez, and so many other naturalists. Christ — alone — among all the philosophers, magicians, &c. declared eternal life – the endlessness of time, the non-existence of death – to be the principal certainty. The necessity and the raison d’être of serenity and devotion.  Lived serenely as an artist greater than all artists — disdaining marble and clay and paint — working in living flesh. I.e. — this extraordinary artist, hardly conceivable with the obtuse instrument of our nervous and stupefied modern brains, made neither statues nor paintings nor even books he states it loud and clear.. he made.. living men, immortals. That’s serious, you know, especially because it’s the truth. 
   That great artist didn’t make books, either — Christian literature as a whole would certainly infuriate him, and its literary products that could find favour beside Luke’s Gospel, Paul’s epistles — so simple in their hard or warlike form — are few and far between. This great artist — Christ — although he disdained writing books on ideas and feelings — was certainly much less disdainful of the spoken word — the parable above all. (What a sower, what a harvest, what a fig tree, &c.) And who would dare tell us that he lied, the day when, scornfully predicting the fall of the buildings of the Romans, he stated, ‘heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away.’7  Those spoken words, which as a prodigal, great lord he didn’t even deign to write down, are one of the highest, the highest summit attained by art, which in them becomes a creative force, a pure creative power.  These reflections, my dear old Bernard — take us a very long way — a very long way — raising us above art itself. They enable us to glimpse — the art of making life, the art of being immortal — alive. Do they have connections with painting? The patron of painters — St Luke — physician, painter, evangelist — having for his symbol — alas — nothing but the ox — is there to give us hope. Nevertheless — our own real life — is humble indeed — our life as painters. Stagnating under the stupefying yoke of the difficulties of a craft almost impossible to practise on this so hostile planet, on the surface of which ‘love of art makes one lose real love’. Since, however, nothing stands in the way — of the supposition that on the other innumerable planets and suns there may also be lines and shapes and colours — we’re still at liberty — to retain a relative serenity as to the possibilities of doing painting in better and changed conditions of existence — an existence changed by a phenomenon perhaps no cleverer and no more surprising than the transformation of the caterpillar into a butterfly, of the white grub into a cockchafer. That existence of painter as butterfly would have for its field of action one of the innumerable stars, 
   which, after death, would perhaps be no more unapproachable, inaccessible to us than the black dots that symbolize towns and villages on the map in our earthly life. Science — scientific reasoning — seems to me to be an instrument that will go a very long way in the future. Because look – it was thought that the earth was flat — that was true — it still is today — from Paris to Asnières, for example. But that didn’t prevent science proving that the earth is above all round. Which nobody disputes nowadays. Now at present, despite that, we’re still in the position of believing that life is flat and goes from birth to death. But life too is probably round, and far superior in extent and potentialities to the single hemisphere that’s known to us at present. Future generations — probably — will enlighten us on this subject that’s so interesting — and then science itself — could — with all due respect — reach conclusions more or less parallel to Christ’s words concerning the other half of existence. Whatever the case — the fact is that we are painters in real life, and it’s a matter of breathing one’s breath as long as one has breath. Ah — E. Delacroix’s beautiful painting — Christ’s boat on the sea of Gennesaret, he — with his pale lemon halo — sleeping, luminous — within the dramatic violet, dark blue, blood-red patch of the group of stunned disciples. On the terrifying emerald sea, rising, rising all the way up to the top of the frame. Ah — the brilliant sketch.  I would make you some croquis were it not that having drawn and painted for three or four days with a model — a Zouave – I’m exhausted — on the contrary, writing is restful and diverting. What I’ve done is very ugly: a drawing of the Zouave, seated, a painted sketch of the Zouave against an all-white wall14 and lastly his portrait against a green door and some orange bricks of a wall. It’s harsh and, well, ugly and badly done. However, since that’s the real difficulty attacked, it may smooth the way in the future. The figures that I do are almost always detestable in my own eyes, and all the more so in others’ eyes — nevertheless, it’s the study of the figure that strengthens us the most, if we do it in a different way than we’re taught at Monsieur Benjamin-Constant’s, for example.
   Your letter gave me great pleasure — the CROQUIS IS VERY VERY INTERESTING17 and I do thank you for it — for my part I’ll send you a drawing one of these days — this evening I’m too worn out in that respect; my eyes are tired, even if my brain isn’t. Listen — do you remember John the Baptist by Puvis? I find it marvellous and as much the MAGICIAN19 as Eugène Delacroix. The passage about John the Baptist that you dug out of the Gospel is absolutely what you saw in it... People pressing around somebody — art thou Christ, art thou Elias? As it would be in our day to ask Impressionism or one of its searcher-representatives, ‘have you found it?’21 That’s just it. At the moment my brother has an exhibition of Claude Monet — 10 paintings done in Antibes from February to May. It seems it’s very beautiful. Have you ever read the life of Luther? Because Cranach, Dürer, Holbein belong to him — it’s he — his personality — that’s the lofty light of the Middle Ages. I like the Sun King no more than you do – extinguisher of light23 it rather seems to me — that Louis XIV — my God, what a pain, in every way, that Methodist Solomon. I don’t like Solomon either, and the Methodists not at all, as well. Solomon seems a hypocritical pagan to me; I really have no respect for his architecture, an imitation of other styles, nor for his writings, which the pagans have done much better. Tell me a bit about where you stand as far as your military service is concerned; should I talk to that second lieutenant of Zouaves or not? Are you going to Africa or not? In your case, do the years count double in Africa or not? Most of all, see that your blood’s in order — you don’t get very far with anaemia — painting goes slowly — better try to make your constitution as tough as old boots, a constitution to make old bones — better live like a monk who goes to the brothel once a fortnight — I do that, it’s not very poetical — but anyway — I feel that my duty is to subordinate my life to painting. If I was in the Louvre with you, I’d really like to see the primitives with you. In the Louvre, I still return with great love to the Dutch, Rembrandt first and foremost — Rembrandt whom I once studied so thoroughly — then Potter, for example — who makes — on a no. 4 or no. 6 panel, a white stallion alone in a meadow, a stallion neighing, and with a hard-on — forlorn under a sky brewing up a thunderstorm – heartbroken in the tender green immensity of a wet meadow26 — ah well, there are wonderful things in the old Dutchmen having no connection with anything at all. Handshake, and thank you again for your letter and for your croquis. Ever yours, Vincent The sonnets are going well27 — i.e. — the colour in them is good — the design isn’t as strong, less sure of itself, rather; the conception’s still hesitant, I don’t know how to put it — its moral purpose isn’t clear. My dear Bernard — I don’t know what I stuck into my letter of yesterday instead of the enclosed sheet1 on the subject of your last sonnet. The fact is that I’m so worn out by work that in the evening — although writing is restful for me — I’m like a broken-down machine, so much has the day in the full sun tired me otherwise. And that’s why I stuck another sheet into your letter instead of this one. On re-reading yesterday’s sheet — well, I’m sending you it as it is; on re-reading it, it seems legible to me and so I’m sending you it. Another hard day’s work today. If you saw my canvases, what would you say about them — you wouldn’t find Cézanne’s almost diffident and conscientious brushstroke there. But since at present I’m painting the same countryside of La Crau and the Camargue — although in a slightly different place – nevertheless, certain colour relationships could remain. What do I know about it — from time to time I couldn’t help thinking of Cézanne, particularly when I realized that his touch is so clumsy in certain studies – disregard the word clumsy — seeing that he probably executed those studies when the mistral was blowing. Having to deal with the same difficulty half the time, I can explain why Cézanne’s touch is sometimes so sure and sometimes seems awkward. It’s his easel that’s wobbling. I’ve sometimes worked excessively fast; is that a fault? I can’t help it. For example I’ve painted a no. 30 canvas — the summer evening2 — at a single sitting. It’s not possible to rework it; to destroy it — why, because I deliberately went outside to make it, out in the mistral. Isn’t it rather intensity of thought than calmness of touch that we’re looking for — and in the given circumstances of impulsive work on the spot and from life, is a calm and controlled touch always possible? Well — it seems to me — no more than fencing moves during an attack. 
   I’ve sent your drawing of the brothel3 to my brother, and I’ve asked him to buy something of yours.  If my brother can, he’ll do it, because he knows very well that I must want to have you sell something. If you wished, I would earmark for an exchange with you the head of a Zouave that I’ve painted. But I won’t speak about it unless I can have you sell something at the same time. That would be in response to your attempt at a brothel. If we executed a brothel together, I’m sure we’d use the study of the Zouave as a character type in it. Ah, if several painters agreed to collaborate on great things. The art of the future might be able to show us examples of that. The thing is, for the paintings that are needed now there would have to be several of us in order to cope with the material difficulties. Well — alas — we’re not at that point — the art of painting doesn’t move as fast as literature. Like yesterday, I’m writing to you this time in great haste, really worn out. And at this moment, too, I’m not capable of drawing; the morning in the fields has tired me out completely in that capacity.  The thing is, it’s tiring, the sun down here. I’m also utterly incapable of judging my own work. I can’t see whether the studies are good or bad. I have seven studies of wheatfields, unfortunately all of them nothing but landscapes, much against my will. Old gold yellow landscapes — done quick quick quick and in a hurry, like the reaper who is silent under the blazing sun, concentrating on getting the job done. I tell myself that you may perhaps — be surprised to see how little I love the Bible myself, which I’ve nevertheless often tried to study a little — there is only this kernel, Christ — who, from the point of view of art, seems superior to me — at any rate something other — than Greek, Indian, Egyptian, Persian antiquity, which went so far. Now I say it again — this Christ is more of an artist than the artists — he works in living spirit and flesh, he makes men instead of statues, so….. as a painter I feel good being an ox …. and I admire the bull, the eagle, the man, with a veneration — which — will prevent my being a man of ambition. Handshake.  Ever yours, Vincent 
   I add about these sonnets8 explanation of what I understand by — their design isn’t really sure of itself: You moralize at the end. You tell society that it’s squalid because the whore makes us think of meat, of the market. Very good, that, the whore is like meat at the butcher’s.  For myself — numbed — I understand, I feel that, I recognize a sensation from my own life, I say: that’s well said. Because the sonorous rhythm of the colourful words suggests to me the brutal reality of the dive with great intensity. But the reproofs addressed at the end to ‘society’, a word as hollow as ‘the good Lord’ to me, numbed as I am, no longer have any effect on me. It isn’t there, I say, and I sink into my numbness again; I forget the poem, at first strong enough to dispel my lethargy. Is that true or not? To report the facts, as you do at the beginning, is to wield the lancet like a surgeon explaining anatomy. 
   I listen, meditative and interested; I watch, but if, later, the surgeon-anatomist is going to moralize at me like that, I find that that last tirade doesn’t have the same value as the anatomy demonstration. To study, to analyze society, that always says more than moralizing.  Nothing would seem more curious to me, however, than to say, for example: ‘see that meat from the market, notice how, all the same, despite everything, it can still be electrified for a moment by the stimulus of a love more refined and unexpected.’ Like the sated caterpillar that no longer eats, that crawls on a wall instead of crawling on a cabbage leaf, this sated female can no longer love, either, even though she goes about it — she seeks, seeks, seeks, does she herself know what for? She’s conscientious, alive, responsive, galvanized, rejuvenated for a moment, but powerless. Yet she still loves — her life’s there, then — make no bones about it — despite the fact that she’s finished and dying as an earthly creature. The butterfly, where does the butterfly emerge, from that sated caterpillar — the cockchafer from that white grub? Here, by the way, is where I am in terms of studies of old whores ———— I’d also very much like to know roughly what I’m the larva of myself, perhaps. My dear old Bernard. Perhaps you’ll be inclined to forgive me for not having replied to your letter straightaway, seeing that I’m attaching a small batch of croquis to this one. In the croquis, The garden, there’s perhaps something like ‘the shaggy carpets of flowers and woven greenery’2 of Crivelli or Virelli, doesn’t much matter. Ah, well — in any case I wanted to reply to your quotations with my pen, but not by writing words. Today, too, I don’t have much of a head for discussion; I’m up to my ears in work. Have made large pen drawings — 2 — an immense flat expanse of country — seen in bird’s-eye view from the top of a hill — vineyards, harvested fields of wheat, all of it multiplied endlessly, streaming away like the surface of a sea towards the horizon bounded by the hillocks of La Crau. It does not look Japanese, and it’s actually the most Japanese thing that I’ve done. 
   A microscopic figure of a ploughman, a little train passing through the wheatfields; that’s the only life there is in it. Listen, I passed – a few days after my arrival — that place with a painter friend. There’s something that would be boring to do, he said. I said nothing myself, but I found that so astonishing that I didn’t even have the strength to give that idiot a piece of my mind. I go back there, go back, go back again — well, I’ve done two drawings of it — of that flat landscape in which there was nothing but the infinite... eternity. Well — while I’m drawing along comes a chap who isn’t a painter but a soldier. I say, ‘Does it astonish you that I find that as beautiful as the sea?’ Now he knew the sea — that one. ‘No — it doesn’t astonish me’ — he says – ‘that you find that as beautiful as the sea — but I find it 
   even more beautiful than the ocean because it’s inhabited.’ Which of the spectators was more the artist, the first or the second, the painter or the soldier — I myself prefer that soldier’s eye. Isn’t that true? Now it’s my turn to say to you, reply to me quickly this time by return of post — to let me know if you agree to make me some croquis of your Breton studies. I have a consignment that’s about to go off, and before it clears off I want to do at least another half a dozen subjects in pen croquis for you. Having few doubts that you will do it for yours, I’m getting down to work on my side, anyway, without even knowing if you want to do that. Now, I’ll send these croquis to my brother, to urge him to take something from them for our collection. 
   I’ve already written to him about that, anyway. But we’re working on something that leaves us absolutely without a sou.  The fact is that Gauguin — who has been very ill — is probably going to spend the coming winter with me here in the south. And there’s the fare, which is worrying us. Once here, well, two together spend less than one alone. All the more reason why I’d like to have some things by you here. Once Gauguin’s here, we’ll try to do something together in Marseille, and will probably exhibit there. Now I’d like to have some things by you too, although without making you lose opportunities for selling in Paris. In any case, I don’t believe I’m making you lose them by encouraging you to exchange croquis of painted studies between us. And as soon as I can, we’ll do another piece of business as well, but am quite hard up now. What I’m convinced of is that if we exhibit in Marseille, sooner or later Gauguin and I will encourage you to join us. Thomas bought Anquetin’s study in the end — the peasant. I shake your hand firmly, more soon, and Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard, Today I’ve just sent you another 9 croquis after painted studies. In this way you’ll see some of the subjects from this nature that inspires père Cézanne. Because La Crau near Aix is roughly the same thing as the surroundings of Tarascon and La Crau here. The Camargue is even simpler, because often there’s nothing left — nothing but poor soil with tamarisk bushes and the coarse kinds of grass that are to these scanty pastures what halfa grass is to the desert. Knowing how much you love Cézanne, I thought these croquis of Provence might please you. Not that there are similarities between a drawing by me and by Cézanne; oh, no, no more than between Monticelli and me — but I too love the region that they have loved so much, and for the same reasons of colour, of logical design. My dear old Bernard — by collaboration2 I didn’t mean that in my view two or more painters should work on the same paintings. 
   By that I meant, rather, works that are divergent but go together and complement each other. Let’s look at the Italian primitives and the German primitives and the Dutch school and the Italians proper, in a word, let’s look at painting in its entirety. Works unintentionally form a ‘group’, a ‘series’. Now then, at present the Impressionists too form a group, in spite of all their disastrous civil wars, in which people on both sides try to get at each others’ throats with a zeal worthy of a better destination and final goal. In our northern school there’s Rembrandt — head of the school — since his influence is felt by anyone who comes close to him. We see, for example, Paulus Potter painting animals rutting and impassioned in landscapes that are also impassioned — in a thunderstorm, in sunshine, in the melancholy of autumn — whereas before knowing Rembrandt this same Paulus Potter was rather dry and meticulous.
   There you have two people who go together like brothers, Rembrandt and Potter. And while Rembrandt probably never touched a painting by Potter with his brush, that doesn’t alter the fact that both Potter and Ruisdael owe to him what’s best in them, that something that affects us deeply when we know how to look at a corner of old Holland through their temperament.  And then there’s the fact that the material difficulties of the painter’s life make collaboration, union among painters, desirable — (just as much as in the days of the guilds of St Luke). By safeguarding their material life, by liking each other as pals instead of getting at each others’ throats, painters would be happier and anyway less ridiculous, less foolish and less guilty. However, I don’t insist, knowing that life carries us along so fast that we don’t have the time to discuss and act simultaneously. That’s why 
   at present, while the union exists only very incompletely, we’re sailing on the high seas in our small and wretched boats, isolated on the great waves of our time. Is it renaissance, is it decline? We have no way of judging that, for we’re too close to avoid being led into error by distortions of perspective. For contemporary events, in our eyes, take on proportions that are probably exaggerated as regards our misfortunes and our merits. I shake your hand firmly and hope to have news from you soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard, A thousand thanks for sending your drawings;1 I very much like the avenue of plane trees beside the sea, with two women chatting in the foreground and the promenaders. Also 

 
the woman under the apple tree3


 
the woman with the parasol4

 then the four drawings of nude women, especially the one washing herself, a grey effect embellished with black, white, yellow, brown. It’s charming. Ah... Rembrandt all admiration for Baudelaire aside — I venture to assume, especially on the basis of those verses that he knew more or less nothing about Rembrandt. I’ve just found and bought here a little etching after Rembrandt, a study of a nude man, realistic and simple; he’s standing, leaning against a door or column in a dark interior. A ray of light from above skims his down-turned face and the bushy red hair. You’d think it a Degas for the body, true and felt in its animality.  But see, have you ever looked closely at ‘the ox’ or the interior of a butcher’s shop in the Louvre? You haven’t looked closely at them, and Baudelaire infinitely less so. 
   It would be a treat for me to spend a morning with you in the Dutch gallery. All that is barely describable. But in front of the paintings I could show you marvels and miracles that are the reason that, for me, the primitives really don’t have my admiration first and foremost and most directly. But there you are; I’m so far from eccentric. A Greek statue, a peasant by Millet, a Dutch portrait, a nude woman by Courbet or Degas, these calm and modelled perfections are the reason that many other things, the primitives as well as the Japanese, seem to me like writing with a pen;10 they interest me infinitely.. but something complete, a perfection, makes the infinite tangible to us. And to enjoy such a thing is like coitus, the moment of the infinite. For instance, do you know a painter called Vermeer, who, for example, painted a very beautiful Dutch lady, pregnant? This strange painter’s palette is blue, lemon yellow, pearl grey, black, white. Of course, in his few paintings12 there are, if it comes to it, all the riches of a complete palette, but the arrangement of lemon yellow, pale blue, pearl grey is as characteristic of him as the black, white, grey, pink is of Velázquez.  Anyway, I know, Rembrandt and the Dutch are scattered around museums and collections, and it’s not very easy to form an idea of them if you only know the Louvre. 
   However, it’s Frenchmen, C. Blanc, Thoré, Fromentin, certain others, who have written better than the Dutch on that art. Those Dutchmen had scarcely any imagination or fantasy, but great taste and the art of arrangement; they didn’t paint Jesus Christs, the Good Lord and others. Rembrandt though – indeed, but he’s the only one (and there are relatively few biblical subjects in his oeuvre), he’s the only one who, as an exception, did Christs, &c. And in his case, they hardly resemble anything by other religious painters; it’s a metaphysical magic. So, Rembrandt painted angels — he makes a portrait of himself as an old man, toothless, wrinkled, wearing a cotton cap — first, painting from life in a mirror15 — he dreams, dreams, and his brush begins his own portrait again, but from memory, and its expression becomes sadder and more saddening; he dreams, dreams on, and why or how I do not know, but just as Socrates and Mohammed had a familiar genie, Rembrandt, behind this old man who bears a resemblance to himself, paints a supernatural angel with a Da Vinci smile. I’m showing you a painter who dreams and who paints from the imagination, and I started off by claiming that the character of the Dutch is that they invent nothing, that they have neither imagination nor fantasy. Am I illogical? No. Rembrandt invented nothing, and that angel and that strange Christ; it’s — that he knew them, felt them there. Delacroix paints a Christ using an unexpected light lemon note, this colourful and luminous note in the painting being what the ineffable strangeness and charm of a star is in a corner of the firmament. Rembrandt works with values in the same way as Delacroix with colours. Now, there’s a gulf between the method of Delacroix and Rembrandt and that of all the rest of religious painting. I’ll write to you again soon. This to thank you for your drawings, which give me enormous pleasure. Have just finished portrait of young girl of 12, brown eyes, black hair and eyebrows, flesh yellow grey, the background white, strongly tinged with veronese, jacket blood-red with violet stripes, skirt blue with large orange spots, an oleander flower in her sweet little hand. I’m so worn out from it that I hardly have a head for writing. More soon, and again, many thanks. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard. You’ll agree, I’ve no doubt at all, that neither you nor I can have a full idea of what Velázquez and Goya were like as men and as painters, because neither you nor I have seen Spain, their country, and so many fine things that have remained in the south. Even so, what we know of them does count for something in itself. It goes without saying that for the northerners, Rembrandt first and foremost, it’s extremely desirable, when judging these painters, to know both their work in its full extent and their country, and the rather intimate and hidden history of those days, and of the customs of the ancient country. I want to repeat to you that neither Baudelaire nor you has a sufficiently clear idea when it comes to Rembrandt. And when it comes to you, I couldn’t encourage you enough to take a long look at major and minor Dutchmen before arriving at an opinion. Here it’s not just a matter of strange precious stones, but it’s a matter of sorting out marvels from among marvels. And a fair amount of paste from among the diamonds. Thus for myself, having been studying my country’s school for 20 years now, in most cases I wouldn’t even reply if the subject came up, so much do I generally hear people talk beside the point when the painters of the north are being discussed. So to you I can only reply, come on, just look a little more closely than that; really, it’s worth the effort a thousand times over. Now if, for example, I claim that the Van Ostade in the Louvre, which shows the painter’s family, the man, the wife, the ten or so kids, is a painting infinitely deserving of study and thought, just like Ter Borch’s Peace of Münster. If the paintings in the gallery in the Louvre that I personally prefer and find the most astonishing are very often forgotten by the very artists who go to see the Dutchmen, then I’m not in the least surprised, knowing that my own choice in that gallery is based on a knowledge of this subject that most of the French couldn’t have. 
   But if, for example, my opinion differed from yours on those subjects, I’m confident that you would agree with me later. What grieves me at the Louvre is to see their Rembrandts getting spoiled and the cretins in the administration damaging many beautiful paintings. Thus the annoying yellow tonality of certain canvases by Rembrandt is an effect of deterioration through humidity or other causes, instances of which I could point out to you.  As difficult to say what Rembrandt’s colour is as to give a name to the Velázquez greys; we could say, for want of something better, ‘Rembrandt gold’, and that’s what we do, but that’s quite vague. Having come to France I have, perhaps better than many Frenchmen themselves, felt Delacroix and Zola, for whom my sincere and frank admiration is boundless.  Since I had a fairly complete idea of Rembrandt. One, Delacroix, proceeds by way of colours, the other, Rembrandt, by values, but they’re on a par. Zola and Balzac, as painters of a society, of reality as a whole, arouse rare artistic emotions in those who love them, for the very reason that they embrace the whole epoch that they paint. When Delacroix paints humanity, life in general instead of an epoch, he belongs to the same family of universal geniuses all the same. I love the closing words of Silvestre, I think it was, who ends a masterly article like this: Thus died — almost smiling — Eugène Delacroix, a painter of high breeding — who had a sun in his head and a thunderstorm in his heart — who went from warriors to saints — from saints to lovers — from lovers to tigers — and from the tiger to flowers. Daumier is also a really great genius. Millet, another painter of an entire race and the settings in which it lives. 
   Possible that these great geniuses are no more than crazies, and that to have faith and boundless admiration for them you’d have to be a crazy too. That may well be — I would prefer my madness to other people’s wisdom. To go to Rembrandt indirectly is perhaps the most direct route. Let’s talk about Frans Hals. Never did he paint Christs, annunciations to shepherds, angels or crucifixions and resurrections; never did he paint voluptuous and bestial naked women. He painted portraits; nothing nothing nothing but that. Portraits of soldiers, gatherings of officers, portraits of magistrates assembled for the business of the republic, portraits of matrons with pink or yellow skin, wearing white bonnets, dressed in wool and black satin, discussing the budget of an orphanage or an almshouse;10 he did portraits of good citizens with their families, the man, his wife, his child;11 he painted the tipsy drinker, the old fishwife full of a witch’s mirth, the beautiful gypsy whore, babies in swaddling-clothes, the gallant, bon vivant gentleman, moustachioed, booted and spurred;16 he painted himself and his wife as young lovers on a turf bench in a garden, after their first wedding night. He painted guttersnipes and laughing urchins, he painted musicians19 and he painted a fat cook. He doesn’t know much more than that, but it’s ———————————— well worth Dante’s Paradise21 and the Michelangelos and Raphaels and even the Greeks. It’s beautiful like Zola, and healthier and more cheerful, but just as alive, because his epoch was healthier and less sad. Now what is Rembrandt? The same thing entirely — a painter of portraits. That’s the healthy, broad, clear idea that one must have first of all of the two eminent Dutchmen, who are on a par, before going into the subject more deeply. 
   This fully understood, All this glorious republic, represented by these two prolific portraitists, re-created in broad strokes, we retain very wide margins for landscapes, interior scenes, animals, philosophical subjects. But I beg you, follow this straightforward argument carefully, which I’m doing my utmost to present to you in a very very simple way. Get him into your head, this Master Frans Hals, painter of various portraits of a whole self-assured and lively and immortal republic. Get into your head the no less great and universal master portrait painter of the Dutch Republic, Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn, a broad and naturalistic and healthy man, as much as Hals himself. And after that we’ll see flowing from that source, Rembrandt, the direct and true pupils, Vermeer of Delft, Fabritius, Nicolas Maes, Pieter de Hooch, Bol; and those influenced by him, Potter, Ruisdael, Ostade, Ter Borch. I mention Fabritius to you there, by whom we know only — two canvases23 — I don’t mention a heap of good painters, and especially not the paste among these diamonds, paste firmly embedded in ordinary French skulls. Am I, my dear old Bernard, terribly incomprehensible this time? I’m trying to make you see the great simple thing, the painting of humanity, let’s rather say of a whole republic, through the simple medium of the portrait. This first and foremost; later — — — if, on the subject of Rembrandt, we’re dealing to some extent with magic, with Christs and nude women, it’s very interesting — but it’s not the main thing. Let Baudelaire hold his tongue in this department, they’re resounding words, and how hollow!!!25 Let’s take Baudelaire for what he is, a modern poet just as Musset is another, but let them leave us alone when we’re talking painting. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent I don’t like your drawing Lubricity as much as the others; I like the tree, though, it has a great look. My dear sister, I want to answer your letter of this morning straightaway. I’ll probably hear from Paris tomorrow what Theo’s doing, whether he can get away or not. I don’t doubt that he’ll come over if he can. It’s always affecting when someone one knows makes the great journey to that other hemisphere of life whose existence we suspect. And that my best wishes go with today’s traveller goes without saying. I’m hard at work here. For my part I find the summer here very beautiful, more beautiful than any I ever experienced in the north, but the people here are complaining a great deal that it’s not the same as usual. Rain now and then in a morning or afternoon, but infinitely less than at home. The harvest already long in. It’s very windy, though, and a very nasty, nagging wind, the mistral, usually troublesome enough when I have to paint in it, like when I lay my canvas flat on the ground and work on my knees. Because the easel doesn’t stand firm. I have a study of a garden, almost a metre wide. Poppies and other red flowers in green in the foreground, then a patch of bluebells. Then a patch of orange and yellow African marigolds, then white and yellow flowers and finally, in the background, pink and lilac and also scabious, dark violet, and red geraniums and sunflowers and a fig tree and oleander and a vine. At the end, black cypresses against little low white houses with orange roofs — and a delicate green-blue strip of sky. I know very well that not a single flower was drawn, that they’re just little licks of colour, red, yellow, orange, green, blue, violet, but the impression of all those colours against one another is nonetheless there in the painting as it is in nature. However, I imagine it would disappoint you and appear ugly were you to see it. You see that the motif is really summery. Uncle Cor has seen work of mine more than once, and he thinks it atrocious. 
   I’m now working on the portrait of a postman with his dark blue uniform with yellow. A head something like that of Socrates, almost no nose, a high forehead, bald pate, small grey eyes, high-coloured full cheeks, a big beard, pepper and salt, big ears. The man is a fervent republican and socialist, reasons very well and knows many things. His wife gave birth today and so he’s in really fine feather and glowing with satisfaction. In fact I much prefer to paint something like this than flowers. But seeing as one can do the one and not neglect the other, I just take the opportunities as they arise. I also have the portrait of a girl of 12, brown eyes, black hair and eyebrows, yellowish matt complexion. She sits in a cane chair, a blood-red and violet striped jacket, a deep blue skirt with orange dots, a branch of oleander in her hand. The background light green, almost white. And I always seek the same thing, a portrait, a landscape, a landscape and a portrait. I hope I’ll also get to paint the baby born today. I also have a garden without flowers, that’s to say a lawn, just mown, very green, with the grey hay spread out in long rows. A weeping ash and some cedars and cypresses, the cedars yellowish and spherical, the cypresses rising high, blue-green. At the end oleander and a corner of green-blue sky. The blue cast shadows of the bushes on the grass. Also a portrait bust of a Zouave, blue uniform with red and yellow facings, sky-blue sash, blood-red cap with blue tassel, tanned by the sun — black hair cut short — eyes like a cat’s, watchful — orange and green, a small head on a neck like a bull’s. The background in this one is a harsh green door, and some orange bricks of the wall and the white plaster.
   What you ask, whether it’s true that I’m going to live with someone else. That’s really quite possible, and with a very spirited painter at that who, however, has a life full of cares like the other Impressionists. And the fortunate owner of a liver complaint. Theo once bought from him a large painting of negresses dressed in pink, blue, orange, yellow cotton under the tamarind, coconut and banana trees, with the sea in the distance. Like Le mariage de Loti, that description of Otaheite. He’s been in Martinique, you see, and he’s worked in that tropical scenery. We also have a second painting by him which he exchanged for a study of mine, a dried-up river with purple mud and pools of water that reflect the pure cobalt blue of the sky, green grass. A negro boy with a red and white cow, a negress in blue, and some green forest. He’s someone who works like one possessed, and he does all sorts of things; he’s in Brittany now. We’d live together for the sake of economy and for each other’s company. If he or I sells something one of these days so that he can make the journey, then he’ll come here. It’s not impossible that something may yet intervene, but it’s still really quite possible that it will happen. And even if it didn’t happen and even if I continued working alone, at any rate working in the same direction as other fellows, although each retains his own manner, means that there’s a certain amount of comradeship and sometimes interesting correspondence. How’s it going with your health? Well, I hope. Above all you must try to be outside a very great deal. I quite often have trouble here with not being able to eat, something more or less like you had in the past. But I manage to steer clear of the rocks. Anyone who isn’t strong must be clever; with our constitutions you and I should take that to heart. 
   Anyway the work, when it progresses, helps a lot. I find it mightily beautiful here in summer, the green is very deep and lush, the air thin and amazingly clear. And yet the wide plain would often look very like Holland — here where there are almost no mountains and rocks — if the colour weren’t different. What amuse me greatly are the more colourful clothes, the women and girls dressed in cheap, simple fabric, but green, red, pink, yellow, Havana, purple, blue, spotted, striped. White scarves, red, green and yellow parasols. A great sun like sulphur that shines on them, the vast blue sky, sometimes it’s as immensely cheerful as Holland is sad. Pity that everyone doesn’t have those two extremes. I must end now. Uncle’s death is a big event for Ma and you, and above all for Aunt. The impression on me is very strange because of course I picture the man from memories of so long ago, of much earlier times, and it seems to me so peculiar that someone one has known at such close quarters has become such a stranger. You’ll be able to understand this. Looked at like this, life is so like a dream, and from the moment that it becomes simplified again and that sick man undertakes his great journey, one understands it better, and it’s certain that I feel about it very much as you do. Theo will also feel it greatly; he had much more to do with Uncle than I. How’s Ma doing at present? I often think about you both, and I wish you the best from the bottom of my heart. Vincent I’m up to my eyes in work, so I seldom have anything else in my head. My address is 2 Place Lamartine Arles B.d.R. If you can do it, keep an eye open for those particular books and prints of mine. My dear old Bernard, I realize that I’ve forgotten to answer your question as to whether Gauguin is still in Pont-Aven. Yes, he’s still there, and if you feel like writing to him am inclined to believe that it will please him. It’s still likely that he’ll join me here shortly, as soon as either one of us is able to find the travel expenses. I don’t believe that this question of the Dutchmen, which we’re discussing these days, is without interest. It’s quite interesting to consult them when it’s a matter of any kind of virility, originality, naturalism. In the first place, I must speak to you again about yourself, about two still lifes that you’ve done, and about the two portraits of your grandmother. Have you ever done better, have you ever been more yourself, and someone? Not in my opinion. Profound study of the first thing to come to hand, of the first person to come along, was enough to really create something. Do you know what made me like these 3 or 4 studies so much? That je ne sais quoi of something deliberate, very wise, that je ne sais quoi of something steady and firm and sure of oneself, which they show. You’ve never been closer to Rembrandt, my dear chap, than then. In Rembrandt’s studio, the incomparable sphinx, Vermeer of Delft, found this extremely sound technique that hasn’t been surpassed. Which today we’re burning... to find. Oh, I know that we’re working and arguing Colour as they did chiaroscuro, value.  What do these differences matter when in the end it’s a question of expressing oneself powerfully? At present you’re examining primitive Italian and German techniques, the symbolic meaning that the Italians’ abstract and mystical drawing may contain. Do so.
   I myself rather like this anecdote about Giotto — there was a competition for the execution of some painting or other of a Virgin. Lots of proposals were sent to the fine arts authorities of those days. One of these proposals, signed Giotto, was simply — an oval —  an egg shape — the authorities, intrigued and trusting — entrust the Virgin in question — to Giotto. Whether it’s true or not I don’t know, but I rather like the anecdote. However, let’s return to Daumier and to your grandmother. When are you going to show us more of them, studies of that soundness? I urge you to do so, while at the same time in no way belittling your investigations concerning the properties of lines in contrary motion — being not at all indifferent, I hope, to the simultaneous contrasts of lines, of forms. The trouble is, do you see, my dear old Bernard, that Giotto, Cimabue, as well as Holbein and Van Eyck, lived in an obeliscal — if you’ll pardon the expression — society, layered, architecturally constructed, in which each individual was a stone, all of them holding together and forming a monumental society. I have no doubt that we’ll again see an incarnation of this society when the socialists logically build their social edifice9 — from which they’re a fair distance away yet. But you know we’re in a state of total laxity and anarchy. We, artists in love with order and symmetry, isolate ourselves and work to define one single thing. Puvis knows that very well, and when he, so wise and so just, decided to descend good-naturedly into the intimacy of our very own epoch, forgetting his Elysian Fields, he made a very fine portrait, the serene old man in his bright, blue interior, reading the novel with a yellow cover — a glass of water beside him, in which a watercolour brush and a rose. And also a society lady, like those the De Goncourts portrayed.
   The Dutchmen, now, we see them painting things just as they are, apparently without thought, the way Courbet painted his beautiful naked women. They make portraits, landscapes, still lifes. One could be stupider than that and commit greater follies. If we don’t know what to do, my dear old Bernard, then let’s do the same as them, if only so as not to allow our scarce mental powers to evaporate in sterile metaphysical meditations that aren’t up to bottling chaos, which is chaotic for the very reason that it won’t fit into any glass of our calibre. We can — and that’s what those Dutchmen did, desperately clever in the eyes of people wedded to system — we can paint an atom of chaos. A horse, a portrait, your grandmother, apples, a landscape. Why do you say that Degas has trouble getting a hard-on? Degas lives like a little lawyer, and he doesn’t like women, knowing that if he liked them and fucked them a lot he would become cerebrally ill and hopeless at painting. Degas’s painting is virile and impersonal precisely because he has resigned himself to being personally no more than a little lawyer, with a horror of riotous living. He watches human animals stronger than himself getting a hard-on and fucking, and he paints them well, precisely because he doesn’t make such great claims about getting a hard-on. Rubens, ah, there you have it, he was a handsome man and a good fucker, Courbet too;13 their health allowed them to drink, eat, fuck. In your case, my poor dear old Bernard, I already told you last spring. Eat well, do your military drill well, don’t fuck too hard; if you don’t fuck too hard, your painting will be all the spunkier for it. 
   Ah, Balzac, that great and powerful artist, already told us very well that for modern artists a certain chastity made them stronger. The Dutchmen were married people making children, a beautiful, very beautiful occupation, very natural. One swallow doesn’t make a summer. I’m not saying that among your new Breton studies there aren’t some virile and strong ones, but I haven’t seen them yet and so wouldn’t be able to talk about them. But — I’ve seen those virile things, the portrait of your grandmother and the still lifes — judging from your drawings I have vague doubts whether these new studies would have the same vigour, just from the virile point of view. These studies that I’m talking about first, you see it’s the first swallow of your summertime as an artist. If we want, ourselves, to get a hard-on for our work, we must sometimes resign ourselves to fucking only a little, and for the rest to be, according as our temperament demands, soldiers or monks. The Dutchmen, once again, had morals, and a quiet, calm, well-ordered life. Delacroix, ah, him — ‘I,’ he said, ‘found painting when I had no teeth nor breath left’. And those who saw this famous artist paint said: when Delacroix paints it’s like the lion devouring his piece of flesh. He fucked only a little, and had only casual love affairs so as not to filch from the time devoted to his work. If in this letter, on the face of it more incoherent, and taken on its own without its connections to the previous correspondence and above all, friendship, than I should wish — if in this letter you find that I have some anxieties — concerns in any case — for your health, foreseeing the hard ordeal that you’ll have to go through in doing your service, obligatory, alas, — then you will read it correctly. I know that the study of the Dutchmen could only do you good, their works being so virile and so spunky and so healthy. 
   Personally, I find continence is quite good for me. It’s enough for our weak, impressionable artists’ brains to give their essence to the creation of our paintings. Because in thinking, calculating, wearing ourselves out, we expend cerebral activity. Why exert ourselves in spending all our creative juices when those who pimp for a living and even their simple, well-fed clients work more to the satisfaction of the genital organs of the registered whore19 in this case than we do? The whore in question has my sympathy more than my compassion. Being exiled, a social outcast, as artists like you and I surely are, ‘outcasts’ too, she is surely therefore our friend and sister. And finding — in this position — of outcast — the same as us — an independence that isn’t without its advantages — all things considered — let’s not adopt a false position by believing we’re serving her through social rehabilitation, which is in any case impractical and would be fatal for her. 
   I’ve just made a portrait of a postman — or rather, two portraits even — Socratic type, no less Socratic for being something of an alcoholic, and with a high colour as a result. His wife had just given birth, the good fellow was glowing with satisfaction. He’s a fierce republican, like père Tanguy. Goddamn, what a subject to paint à la Daumier, eh? He was getting too stiff while posing, and that’s why I painted him twice, the second time at a single sitting, on white canvas, background blue, almost white, in the face all the broken tones: yellow, green, purples, pinks, reds, the uniform Prussian blue trimmed with yellow.  Write to me soon if you feel like it; am very encumbered and haven’t yet found time for figure sketches. Handshake. Yours truly, Vincent Cézanne is as much a respectably married man as the old Dutchmen were. If he has a good hard-on in his work it’s because he’s not overly dissipated through riotous living. My dear Bernard, I want to do figures, figures and more figures, it’s stronger than me, this series of bipeds from the baby to Socrates1 and from the black-haired woman with white skin to the woman with yellow hair and a sunburnt face the colour of brick. Meanwhile, I mostly do other things. Thanks for your letter; this time I’m writing in great haste and really worn out. I’m very pleased that you’ve joined Gauguin. Ah, I do have a new figure all the same, which is absolutely a continuation of certain studies of heads done in Holland; I showed you them once, with a painting from that time, potato eaters. I wish I could show it to you. 
   Again it’s a study in which colour plays a role that the black and white of a drawing couldn’t convey. I wanted to send you a very large and very carefully finished drawing of it. Well — it turned into something entirely different, while still being correct. Because once again the colour suggests the scorched air of harvest time at midday in the blistering heat, and without that it’s a different painting. I would dare to believe that you and Gauguin would understand it, but how ugly they’ll find it! You fellows know what a peasant is, how much of the wild animal there is when you come across somebody pure-bred. I also have a man unloading a sand boat. That is, there are two boats, purplish pink, in Veronese green water, with yellow-grey sand, wheelbarrows, planks, a little blue and yellow man. 
   All of it seen from the top of a quay overhanging everything in a bird’s-eye view. No sky. It’s just a sketch, or rather, a rough sketch done out in the mistral. Next, I’m attempting to do dusty thistles with a great swarm of butterflies swirling above them. Oh, the beautiful sun down here in high summer; it beats down on your head and I have no doubt at all that it drives you crazy. Now being that way already, all I do is enjoy it. I’m thinking of decorating my studio with half a dozen paintings of Sunflowers. A decoration in which harsh or broken yellows will burst against various blue backgrounds, from the palest Veronese to royal blue, framed with thin laths painted in orange lead. Sorts of effects of stained-glass windows of a Gothic church.
   Ah, my dear pals, we crazy ones, let’s anyway enjoy with our eyes, shall we? Alas, nature gets paid in kind, and our bodies are despicable and sometimes a heavy burden. But since Giotto, a sickly character, that’s the way things are. Oh, and nevertheless, what delight of the eye and what laughter, the toothless laughter of Rembrandt the old lion, his head covered in a cloth, his palette in his hand. How I’d like to spend these present days in Pont-Aven, but anyway, I console myself by reconsidering the sunflowers. I shake your hand firmly; more soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear sister, I’m dropping you a line in haste so as not to wait any longer to tell you how much it delights me that you’re in Paris, and I imagine you’ll be seeing a great deal of it these days. Next year, when I’m living with my friend Gauguin, it’s not exactly impossible that it might be that you could also come as far as the Mediterranean. I believe you’d find it so beautiful here. What do you think of the painting of those negresses by Gauguin that Theo has? I could imagine that you’ll understand it. At the moment I’m working on a bouquet of 12 sunflowers in a yellow earthenware pot, and have a plan to decorate the whole studio with nothing but sunflowers. I hope that you’ll often go and look at the Luxembourg and the modern paintings in the Louvre so that you get an idea of what a Millet, a Jules Breton, a Daubigny, a Corot is. You can keep the rest. Except — Delacroix. 
         Although people are now working in yet another very different manner, the work of Delacroix, of Millet, of Corot, that remains and the changes don’t affect it. I hope that you’ll take some study of mine with you for your room when you go back to Holland. If I can get the mother and father to agree to let me paint it, then I’ll do a child in a cradle one of these days. The father didn’t want to have it baptized — he’s a staunch revolutionary, and when the family complained, possibly on account of the christening feast, then he said that the christening feast would go ahead after all, but that he would baptize it himself. Then he sang the Marseillaise hideously and named the child Marcelle, like the daughter of the good General Boulanger, to the great vexation of this innocent child’s grandmother6 and other members of the family. The longer I’m here the more beautiful I find the countryside. Have you read Tartarin de Tarascon by Daudet? Be sure to, and Tartarin sur les Alpes, for they’re certainly not the least of Daudet’s novels.
   You’ll certainly notice that in the summer in Paris the sun shines much more strongly than at home. There’s a similar difference again between Paris and here. I wouldn’t mind going a bit further, though, where the land isn’t as flat, as I’ve actually never seen a mountain in my life. We’ll do that sometime when Gauguin’s here. But I’ll stay here in Arles until then. And, as soon as he comes, would like to go on a walking tour together all over Provence. I’m busy with my sunflowers, and in fact can think of nothing to say, so I’ll just end, wishing Theo and you really good days and fine weather. Vincent My dear sister, If you’ll let me write to you in French, that will really make my letter easier for me. You please me much more by being moved by sculpture than by painting — all the more so since Theo assures me that you also have a good eye for paintings. Naturally, that couldn’t yet be a settled taste, which will never waver, but intuition, instinct, is already a great deal, and precisely what everyone doesn’t always have. But all the same, I’m very curious to know what effect the Luxembourg will have on you. Is it true, as I think in moments when I’m in a good mood, that what is alive in art, and eternally alive, is first the painter and then the painting? Well, what difference does that make — but if one sees people working it’s still something one doesn’t find under glass in museums. Poor Miss Harriet in Guy de Maupassant, she was right, perhaps.
   But was the painter wrong to go with the farm-girl? Perhaps not. In life there’s always a fate that’s very annoying. And many painters die or go mad from despair, or become paralyzed in their production because nobody loves them personally. Have you read Whitman’s American poems yet? Theo should have them, and I really urge you to read them, first because they’re really beautiful, and also, English people are talking about them a lot at the moment. He sees in the future, and even in the present, a world of health, of generous, frank carnal love — of friendship — of work, with the great starry firmament, something, in short, that one could only call God and eternity, put back in place above this world. They make you smile at first, they’re so candid, and then they make you think, for the same reason. The prayer of Christopher Columbus is very beautiful.
   What do you say about Monticelli’s bouquet of flowers that’s at Theo’s, and about Prévost’s Spanish woman? There are two real paintings of the south. I myself think about Monticelli a great deal down here. He was a strong man — a little, even very, cracked — dreaming of sunshine and love and gaiety, but always frustrated by poverty, a colourist’s extremely refined taste, a man of rare breeding, carrying on the best ancient traditions. He died in Marseille, rather sadly and probably after going through a real Gethsemane. Ah well, I myself am sure that I’ll carry him on here as if I were his son or his brother. We were talking just now about a fate that seemed sad to us. But isn’t there another, delightful fate? And what is it to us if there is or isn’t a resurrection, when we see a living man rise up immediately in a dead man’s place? Taking up the same cause, carrying on the same work, living the same life, dying the same death.
   When friend Gauguin’s here, and we go to Marseille, I firmly intend to walk there on the Canebière, dressed exactly like him, as I’ve seen his portrait, with an enormous yellow hat, a black velvet jacket, white trousers, yellow gloves and a reed cane and with a great southern air. And I’ll find Marseillais who knew him when he was alive, and if you’ve read in Tartarin what fên de brût is We’ll make quite a noise on that occasion. Monticelli is a painter who did the south all in yellow, all in orange, all in sulphur. Most painters, because they’re not colourists, properly speaking, don’t see these colours there, and declare that a painter who sees with other eyes than theirs is mad. (In the Luxembourg you’ll see Montenards that aren’t yellow, and I like them very much all the same. But it’s likely that Montenard would find what I do totally contemptible.) All that is to be expected, of course. So I’ve already prepared especially a painting all in yellow of sunflowers (14 flowers) in a yellow vase and against a yellow background11 (it’s yet another one, in addition to the previous one with 12 flowers against a blue-green background). And I expect one day to exhibit that one in Marseille. And you’ll see that there’ll be some Marseillais or other who will remember what Monticelli once said and did. Has Theo shown you the barbotine yet? It’s really fine. Enjoy yourself, I kiss you in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear sister, Your letter gave me great pleasure, and today I have the leisure to reply to you in peace and quiet. So your visit to Paris was a great success. I would really like it if you were to come here too next year. At the moment I’m furnishing the studio in such a way as always to be able to put someone up. Because there are 2 small rooms upstairs, which look out on a very pretty public garden, and where you can see the sunrise in the morning. I’ll arrange one of these rooms for putting up a friend, and the other one will be for me. I want nothing there but straw-bottomed chairs and a table and a deal bed. The walls whitewashed, the tiles red. But in it I want a great wealth of portraits and painted studies of figures, which I plan to do as I go along. I have one to start with, the portrait of a young Belgian Impressionist; I’ve painted him as something of a poet, his refined and nervous head standing out against a deep ultramarine background of the night sky, with the twinkling of the stars. Now the other room, I would like it almost elegant, with a walnut bed with a blue blanket. 
   And all the rest, the dressing-table and the chest of drawers too, in matt walnut. I want to stuff at least 6 very large canvases into this tiny little room, the way the Japanese do, especially the huge bouquets of sunflowers. You know that the Japanese instinctively look for contrasts, and eat sweetened peppers, salty sweets, and fried ices and frozen fried dishes. So, too, following the same system you should probably only put very small paintings in a large room, but in a very small room you’ll put a lot of big ones. I hope the day will come when I’ll be able to show you this beautiful part of the world. I’ve just finished a canvas of a café interior at night, lit by lamps. Some poor night-prowlers are sleeping in a corner. The room is painted red, and inside, in the gaslight, the green billiard table, which casts an immense shadow over the floor. In this canvas there are 6 or 7 different reds, from blood-red to delicate pink, contrasting with the same number of pale or dark greens.
   Today I sent Theo a drawing of it, which is like a Japanese print. Theo wrote telling me that he has given you some Japanese prints. It’s certainly the most practical way of getting to understand the direction that painting has taken at present. Colourful and bright. For myself, I don’t need Japanese prints here, because I’m always saying to myself that I’m in Japan here. That as a result I only have to open my eyes and paint right in front of me what makes an impression on me. Have you seen a tiny little mask of a fat, smiling Japanese woman at our place? The expression on that little mask is really surprising.  Did you think of taking one of my paintings with you for yourself? I hope so, and I’m quite intrigued to know which you would have chosen. I myself thought you would have taken the white huts under the blue sky among the greenery, which I did at Saintes-Maries, on the Mediterranean. I should have gone back to Saintes-Maries already, now that there are people on the beach. But anyway, I have so much to do right here. 
   I definitely want to paint a starry sky now. It often seems to me that the night is even more richly coloured than the day, coloured in the most intense violets, blues and greens. If you look carefully you’ll see that some stars are lemony, others have a pink, green, forget-me-not blue glow. And without labouring the point, it’s clear that to paint a starry sky it’s not nearly enough to put white spots on blue-black. My house here is painted outside in the yellow of fresh butter, with garish green shutters, and it’s in the full sun on the square, where there’s a green garden of plane trees, oleanders, acacias. And inside, it’s all whitewashed, and the floor’s of red bricks. And the intense blue sky above. Inside, I can live and breathe, and think and paint. And it seems to me that I should go further into the south rather than going back up north, because I have too great a need of the strong heat so that my blood circulates normally. I’m in really much better health here than in Paris. Now I have scarcely a doubt that for you, too, you would like the south enormously. It’s the sun, that has never sufficiently penetrated us northerners. I started this letter several days ago, up to here, and I’m picking it up again now. 
   I was interrupted precisely by the work that a new painting of the outside of a café in the evening has been giving me these past few days. On the terrace, there are little figures of people drinking. A huge yellow lantern lights the terrace, the façade, the pavement, and even projects light over the cobblestones of the street, which takes on a violet-pink tinge. The gables of the houses on a street that leads away under the blue sky studded with stars are dark blue or violet, with a green tree. Now there’s a painting of night without black. With nothing but beautiful blue, violet and green, and in these surroundings the lighted square is coloured pale sulphur, lemon green. I enormously enjoy painting on the spot at night. In the past they used to draw, and paint the picture from the drawing in the daytime. But I find that it suits me to paint the thing straightaway. It’s quite true that I may take a blue for a green in the dark, a blue lilac for a pink lilac, since you can’t make out the nature of the tone clearly. But it’s the only way of getting away from the conventional black night with a poor, pallid and whitish light, while in fact a mere candle by itself gives us the richest yellows and oranges. I’ve also done a new portrait of myself, as a study, in which I look like a Japanese. You never told me if you had read Guy de Maupassant’s Bel-ami, and what you now think of his talent in general. I say this because the beginning of Bel-ami is precisely the description of a starry night in Paris, with the lighted cafés of the boulevard, and it’s something like the same subject that I’ve painted just now. 
   Speaking of Guy de Maupassant, I find what he does really beautiful, and I really recommend that you read everything that he’s done. Zola — Maupassant, De Goncourt, one has to have read them as thoroughly as possible in order to get a reasonably clear idea of the modern novel. Have you read Balzac? I’m reading him again here. My dear sister, I believe that at present we must paint nature’s rich and magnificent aspects; we need good cheer and happiness, hope and love. The uglier, older, meaner, iller, poorer I get, the more I wish to take my revenge by doing brilliant colour, well arranged, resplendent.  Jewellers are old and ugly too, before they know how to arrange precious stones well. And arranging colours in a painting to make them shimmer and stand out through their contrasts, that’s something like arranging jewels or — designing costumes. You’ll see now that by regularly looking at Japanese prints you’ll enjoy making bouquets even more, working among flowers. I must finish this letter if I want it to go off today. I’ll be very happy to have the photograph of our mother that you mention, so don’t forget to send it to me. Give my warm regards to our mother; I often think of you both, and I’m really pleased that now you know our life a little better. I really fear that Theo will find himself too lonely. But one of these days there’ll be a Belgian Impressionist painter, the one I mentioned above, who’ll come to spend some time in Paris. And there’ll be many other painters who’ll soon come back to Paris with their studies done during the summer. I kiss you affectionately, and Mother too. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard. Thanks for your letter, but what surprises me a little is to hear you say, ‘Oh, no way of doing Gauguin’s portrait!’1 Why no way? That’s all rubbish. But I’m not pressing the point, and so we categorically won’t mention that exchange any more. So even Gauguin, for his own part, hasn’t even thought of doing yours. Here you have portraitists, living for so long side by side and they don’t agree on posing for each other and they’ll separate without having portrayed each other. Well! I’m not pressing the point. And I repeat, there’s no longer a question of an exchange. So I really hope to do your portrait and Gauguin’s myself one day, the first time we get together. Which is bound to happen. 
   One of these days I’m going to do the portrait of that second lieutenant of Zouaves whom I’ve spoken to you about, who’s now on the point of leaving for Africa. Why haven’t you replied to me about your plans regarding your military service? Now let’s talk a little about what you say, that you’re thinking of coming to spend the winter in Arles. I’ve deliberately set myself up here in such a way as to be able to fit someone in if necessary. If Gauguin comes, however. He still hasn’t categorically said no, in any case. But even if I could put you up, I don’t see that you could feed yourself well here for less than 3 francs a day. And I’d prefer to say 4 francs. Naturally, in the case of being broke, we could make many meals cheaply at the studio, certainly we could save that way; all the same, living here, I tell you, comes a bit dearer than in Pont-Aven, where I believe you’re paying, aren’t you, only 2. francs a day, and that’s for everything. Lodging included. 
   And what if the thing that would tempt you the most — painting in the brothels — which is certainly excellent — couldn’t after all be done here for free? Wait for that until you have your uniform, then; here and elsewhere, soldiers can do a whole lot of things in it for free. I, for example — it’s true that I’ve just done that study of a night café5 — but that, although it’s a house of assignation, and from time to time you see a whore sitting there at a table with her fellow — I myself, I say, I haven’t yet been able to do a brothel as such, precisely because it would cost me more money than I’m forced to have, to do it reasonably well and seriously. And because I refrain from beginning it before I feel sufficiently sure, as far as the wallet goes, of being able to complete that painting properly. Now, all right. We’d drink some glasses of beer in there, we’d meet people there; we’d work half from the imagination, half with a model. And if we wanted to, I’m not saying that it might not be possible to do it. But I for one, 
   I’m not in any hurry for anything, now. Projects so often fall through, and the best calculations you make; while by taking advantage of chance, and working from day to day without bias, you do a whole lot of unforeseen things. So in no way can I encourage you to come here with the express purpose – excellent, without any doubt — of doing brothels. I repeat, once you’re a soldier, you’ll have a splendid opportunity for that, and in your own interest you would perhaps do well to wait until you have your uniform. But, my dear old Bernard, I want to be very clear and plain in saying to you, do come and spend your time in Africa. The south will delight you and make you a great artist; Gauguin himself owes his superiority to the south. I’ve been looking at the stronger sun down here for months and months now. And the result is that, from the point of view of colour, what remains more than anything for me, having gained the experience, is Delacroix and Monticelli, those painters who nowadays are wrongly said to be pure romantics, people of exaggerated imagination. But anyway, do you see, the south, that was done so drily by Gérôme and Fromentin, is from this place on essentially a region whose intimate charm could only be interpreted by a colourist’s colour. I hope that you’ll write to me again soon. I daren’t take it upon myself to encourage just anyone to come here; if somebody comes of his own accord, well, that’s his business, but as far as advising the thing, I’ll never do it. For myself, I’m staying here, and naturally it would please me greatly if you were to spend the winter here. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard, I’m writing a line to thank you kindly for your drawings; I find them done in a bit too much of a rush, and I like the two drawings of whores the most;1 but there’s an idea in all of them. I’ve been overloaded with work these past few days, because the weather’s really beautiful and you have to make the most of the fine days, which are short. I can’t alter the price that I quoted to you, 3 francs for food alone, and in addition, well, whatever there would be on top of that. But I have no doubt that everything Gauguin tells you about the prices down here is correct. But I see you near your departure to do your service, and would like to be able to persuade your father to supply you with enough to strengthen you thoroughly first, without your work suffering as a result. Let him stump up at last, to the point of giving you whatever’s fair during the interval between now and your service. I haven’t ceased writing this same thing to you all the time, that if you go to Africa you’ll work there and you’ll see just the 
   kind of nature you have to see in order to develop your talent as a painter and colourist to its full extent. But that can be done only to the detriment of your poor carcass, if your father doesn’t make it possible for you to avoid becoming anaemic or to catch debilitating dysentery through lack of strengthening food before this African ordeal. It’s scarcely possible to make yourself strong over there, and if you go to a hot climate, I’m far from saying you have to fatten yourself up beforehand, but I do say you have to pay attention to your food for some time in advance. And I’m sticking to that, having found myself doing well here on that regime, and the heat of Africa is something different again from that of Arles. You’ll emerge from this ordeal of your service much stronger, and strong enough for a whole career as an artist or — broken. 
   In any event, I’d like you to come enormously, and if Gauguin comes too, all that will be left for us to regret will be that it’s winter and not the warm season. I’m beginning to believe more and more that food has something to do with our power to think and to make paintings; as for me, it doesn’t contribute to the success of my work if my stomach’s bothering me. Anyway, I believe that if your father wanted quietly to keep your paintings and to fund you fairly generously, on balance he’ll lose less than by doing otherwise. In the south, the senses are elated, the hand becomes nimbler, the eye livelier, the brain clearer, on one condition, though: that dysentery or something else doesn’t spoil all that by debilitating you too much. On that point, I really dare to take my stand in believing that he who loves artistic work will see his productive capacities develop in the south, but watch your blood, and watch everything else. 
    And now you’ll perhaps tell me that I’m bloody well getting on your nerves with all that. That you want to go to the brothel, and that you don’t give a damn about all the rest. My word, that depends, but I can’t say other than that. Art is long and life is short, and we must wait patiently while trying to sell our skin dearly. Me, I’d really like to be your age and go off with whatever knowledge I had to do my service in Africa. But for example, I’d get myself a better body than the one I have. If Gauguin and I are here, as is probable, together — then here for certain we’ll do our level best to spare you expenses. But on his side, your father should certainly do his best too, and have confidence in us that we’re not trying to extract money from him pointlessly. But in order to do good work you have to eat well, be well housed, have a screw from time to time, smoke your pipe and drink your coffee in peace. I’m not saying that the rest counts for nothing, and leave everyone free to do as he sees fit, but I do say that this system seems preferable to many others to me. Good handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Boch, Many thanks for your letter, which gave me great pleasure. I congratulate you on not having hesitated this time — and on having tackled the Borinage. That’s a field in which you’ll be able to work for the whole of your life, the extraordinary landscape as well as the human figure! The female thrutchers in pit-rags, in particular, are superb. If you ever go to Petit-Wasmes, would you find out if Jean Baptiste Denis (farmer) and Joseph Quinez (miner)2 are still living there, and tell them on my behalf that I’ve never forgotten the Borinage, and that I’ll always have a wish to see it again? Now I have to tell you some news, that is that I’ve at last furnished the house and that I immediately furnished a bedroom for Gauguin as well, or for whoever will come. The house is much more cheerful now that it’s furnished. Afterwards I worked at full tilt, because the autumn is windless and superb. And so I have 7 square no. 30 canvases on the go. First of all the night café where I stayed, with lamp effects — painted at night.
   3 views of the public garden in front of my house.  Here’s one of those views. A round cypress or Cedar bush in bottle green. In the lemony green lawn. At the back, a row of oleanders and 2 small figures. A blue sky in raw cobalt. You can see that it’s much simpler than before. And ploughed fields, a landscape with nothing but clods of earth, the furrows the colour of an old clog under the forget-me-not sky with white flecks. And a view of my house and its surroundings under a sulphur sun, the sky hard, bright cobalt. That’s a difficult one! And a view of the café on place du Forum, where we used to go, painted at night. And lastly, a study of the Rhône, of the town under gaslight and reflected in the blue river. With the starry sky above — with the Great Bear — with a pink and green sparkle on the cobalt blue field of the night sky, while the light of the town and its harsh reflections are of a red gold and a green tinged with bronze. 
   Painted at night. The garden with the oleanders and the round bush is impasted like barbotine. Your portrait is in my bedroom, with the one of Milliet the Zouave that I’ve just done. I’d very much like to ask you to do an exchange with me of one of your studies of the coal-mines. Wait, I’ll send you a study first then, which I’m sure will be one of those that will seem entirely unfamiliar to you. Because if you saw the night studies, you’d perhaps like them better than the studies of sunlight. Well, let me decide. Because I sincerely hope that our relationship, once embarked upon, will last for good. Because everything you do will be of extraordinary interest to me, since I so much love that sad region of the Borinage, which will always be unforgettable to me. If I come to Paris next year, then I’m more or less determined to push on as far as Mons. And perhaps to my own country, to do places there that I knew before. Thus, in the Borinage, Marcasse or St-Antoine at Petit-Wasmes. And then the Cour de l’Agrappe, at your place in Frameries. In short, it was in the Borinage that I began to work from nature for the first time. But I destroyed all that long ago, of course. But it touches my heart that in the end all these places are going to be painted.  You’ll see how the ideas will come to you. I’m writing to you in great haste, but I wanted to reply right away. 
   Included herewith a very bad croquis of the starry night. All these paintings are square no. 30 canvases. Had you stayed here until now you’d have taken away other studies. Because I tell you, nature has been extraordinarily beautiful. More than once I’ve done a no. 30 canvas in a day, but then it was the case that from morning till sunset I didn’t move from the sitting except to eat a bite. My brother wrote to me that he had seen you in passing. Ah well, next year I sincerely hope that we’ll meet again; above all don’t forget to write me your address if you move house, or give me your precise permanent address — at la Louvière, if I remember rightly. Because it will be excellent to work with continuity in the coal-fields and then, in order to see something entirely different, to come to the region of oleanders and the sulphur sun. Is your sister17 also going to do miners? There’s certainly work for two people there. I believe that it’s very fortunate for you that the two of you both do painting in your house. Ah well, I have to go to work in the vineyard, near Montmajour. It’s all purplish yellow green under the blue sky, a beautiful, colour motif. Good handshake and good luck, and much success in your work. Ever yours, Vincent Pardon my great haste; I don’t even have time to re-read the letter. 
    My dear Gauguin, This morning, I received your excellent letter, which I’ve immediately sent to my brother;1 your conception of the Impressionist in general, of which your portrait2 is a symbol, is striking. I couldn’t be more intrigued to see it — but it will seem to me, I’m already sure, that this work is too important for me to wish to have it as an exchange.  But if you wish to keep it for us, my brother will buy it from you, as I immediately asked him, at the first opportunity if you wish, and let’s hope that will be very soon. Because we’ll try once again to urge the possibility of your coming. I must tell you that even while working I never cease to think about this enterprise of setting up a studio with yourself and me as permanent residents, but which we’d both wish to make into a shelter and a refuge for our pals at moments when they find themselves at an impasse in their struggle. When you left Paris, my brother and I spent more time there together that will always remain unforgettable to me. Our discussions took on a broader scope — with Guillaumin, with Pissarro, father and son, with Seurat, whom I didn’t know (I visited his studio just a few hours before my departure). In these discussions, it was often a matter of the thing that’s so dear to our hearts, both my brother’s and mine, the steps to be taken in order to preserve the financial existence of painters, and to preserve the means of production (colours, canvases), and to preserve directly to them their share in the price 
   that their paintings at present fetch only when they have long ceased to be the property of the artists. When you’re here we’ll go back over all those discussions. In any event, when I left Paris very, very upset, quite ill and almost an alcoholic through overdoing it, while my strength was abandoning me — then I withdrew into myself, and without daring to hope yet. At present, dimly on the horizon, here it comes to me nevertheless — hope —that intermittent hope that has sometimes consoled me in my lonely life. Now I’d like to see you taking a very large share in this belief that we’ll be relatively successful in founding something lasting. When we’ll talk about those strange days of discussions in the poor studios and the cafés of the Petit Boulevard, and you’ll see in full our idea, my brother’s and mine, which hasn’t in any way been carried out, in terms of forming an association. Nevertheless, you’ll see that it is such that everything that we’ll do in future to remedy the terrible state of these past few years will either be just what we said, or something similar to it. So unshakeable a basis will we have given the thing. And you’ll admit, when you have the full explanation, that we’ve gone well beyond the plan we’ve already told you about. It’s no more than our duty as picture dealers to have gone further, because you perhaps know that I too spent years in the trade, and I don’t look down on a profession in which I’ve eaten my daily bread. 
   Suffice it to say that I don’t believe that even when apparently cutting yourself off from Paris you will cease to feel that you’re in fairly direct contact with Paris.  I have an extraordinary fever for work these days, at present I’m grappling with a landscape with blue sky above an immense green, purple, yellow vine with black and orange shoots. Little figures of ladies with red sunshades, little figures of grape-pickers with their cart further liven it up.  Foreground of grey sand. Once again square no. 30 canvas for the decoration of the house. I have a portrait of myself, all ash-coloured. The ashy colour that comes from mixing Veronese with orange lead, on a pale background of uniform Veronese, with a red-brown garment. But exaggerating my personality also, I looked more for the character of a bonze, a simple worshipper of the eternal Buddha. It cost me a good deal of trouble, but I’ll have to do it all over again if I want to express the thing. I’ll have to cure myself even further of the conventional numbness of our so-called civilized state, in order to have a better model for a better painting. Something that gave me enormous pleasure; I received a letter from Boch yesterday (his sister is one of the Belgian Vingtistes), who writes that he’s settled in the Borinage to paint miners and coal-mines there. He’ll return, though, to what he has in mind in the south — to vary his impressions, and in that case will certainly come to Arles. I find my artistic ideas extremely commonplace in comparison with yours. I always have an animal’s coarse appetites. I forget everything for the external beauty of things, which I’m unable to render because I make it ugly in my painting, and coarse, whereas nature seems perfect to me. Now, however, the energy of my bony carcass is such that it goes straight to the target; from that comes a perhaps sometimes original sincerity in what I make, if, that is, the subject lends itself to my rough and unskilful execution. 
   I believe that if from now on you began to think of yourself as the head of this studio, which we’ll attempt to make a refuge for several people, little by little, bit by bit, as our unremitting work provides us with the means to bring the thing to completion — I believe that then you’ll feel relatively consoled for your present misfortunes of penury and illness, considering that we’re probably giving our lives for a generation of painters that will survive for many years to come. These parts of the world have already seen both the cult of Venus11 —essentially artistic in Greece — and the poets and artists of the Renaissance. Where these things have been able to flower, Impressionism can do so too. About the room where you’ll stay, I’ve made a decoration especially for it, the garden of a poet (in the croquis Bernard has there’s a first idea for it, later simplified). The unremarkable public garden contains plants and bushes that make one dream of landscapes in which one may readily picture to oneself Botticelli, Giotto, Petrarch, Dante and Boccaccio. In the decoration I’ve tried to tease out the essence of what constitutes the changeless character of the region. And I’d have wished to paint this garden in such a way that one would think both of the old poet of this place (or rather, of Avignon), Petrarch, and of its new poet — Paul Gauguin. However clumsy this effort, you’ll still see, perhaps, that while preparing your studio I’ve thought of you with very deep feeling. Let’s be of good heart for the success of our enterprise, and may you continue to feel very much at home here. Because I’m so strongly inclined to believe that all this will last for a long time. Good handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Only I’m afraid that you’ll find Brittany more beautiful — even though you may well see nothing more beautiful than things out of Daumier, figures here are often pure Daumier. Now, as for you, it won’t take you long to discover, under all the modernity, the ancient world and the Renaissance, which is sleeping. Now, as far as they’re concerned, you’re at liberty to reawaken them.  Bernard tells me that he, Moret, Laval and someone else would do an exchange with me. I am really, in principle, a great supporter of the system of exchanges among artists, since I see that it occupied a considerable place in the life of the Japanese painters. So one of these days I’ll send you such studies as I have to spare, in the dry state, and you’ll have first choice.  But I won’t exchange a single one with you if on your part it would mean costing you something as significant as your portrait, which would be too beautiful. For sure, I wouldn’t dare, because my brother will gladly buy it from you against a whole month’s allowance. My dear old Bernard, This time you deserve bigger compliments for the little croquis of the two Breton women in your letter than for the other 6, since the little croquis has a great style. I’m behind myself as far as croquis go, being so totally absorbed these recent superb days with square no. 30 canvases, which wear me out considerably and I intend to use to decorate the house. You will have received my letter explaining the serious reasons for advising you to try to persuade your father to give you a little more freedom as far as your purse is concerned, should he pay your fare to Arles. I believe that you would repay him through your work. And that way you would stay longer with Gauguin, and leaving to do your service, you would leave for a good artistic campaign. If your father had a son who was a prospector and discoverer of raw gold among the pebbles and on the pavement, your father would certainly not look down on that talent. Now in my opinion, you have absolutely the equivalent of that. Your father, while he might regret that it wasn’t shiny new gold, minted in louis, would set out to make a collection of your finds, and to sell them only for a reasonable price. Let him do the same thing for your paintings and drawings, which are as rare and as valuable on the market as rare stones or rare metal. That’s absolutely true — a painting is as difficult to make as a large or small diamond is to find.  Now while everyone acknowledges the value of a gold louis or a real pearl, unfortunately those who set store by paintings and believe in them are few and far between. But they do exist. And in any case, there’s nothing better to do than to wait without getting impatient, even if one has to wait for a long time. On your side, think a little about what I’m telling you about the cost of living here, and should you have a strong wish to come to Arles with Gauguin and me, 
   be sure to tell your father that with a little more money you would make much better paintings. The idea of making a kind of freemasonry of painters doesn’t please me hugely;7 I deeply despise rules, institutions, &c., in short, I’m looking for something other than dogmas, which, very far from settling things, only cause endless disputes. It’s a sign of decadence. Now, as a union of painters exists so far only in the form of a vague but very broad sketch, then let’s calmly allow what must happen to happen. It will be better if it crystallizes naturally; the more one talks about it, the less it comes about. If you wish to support it, you have only to continue with Gauguin and me. It’s in progress, let’s not talk any more; if it must come it will come about without big negotiations but through calm and well-thought-out actions.  As regards the exchanges, it’s precisely because I’ve often had occasion to hear mention in your letters of Laval, Moret and the other young man, that I have a great desire to get to know them. But — I don’t have 5 dry studies — will have to add at least two slightly more serious attempts at paintings, a portrait of myself and a landscape angry with a nasty mistral. Then I would have a study of a little garden of multicoloured flowers. A study of grey and dusty thistles,
   and lastly a still life of old peasants’ shoes. And a small landscape of nothing at all, in which there’s nothing but a bit of an expanse. Now, if these studies aren’t found pleasing, and if one or other preferred not to take part, all you have to do is keep those that are wanted and return with the exchanges those that aren’t wanted. We’re in no hurry, and in exchanges it’s better on both sides to try to give something good. If it’s dry enough to be rolled up after being exposed to the sun tomorrow, I’ll add a landscape of men unloading sand, another project and attempt at a painting, in which there’s a more fully developed sense of purpose.  I can’t send a repetition of the night café yet because it hasn’t even been started, but I’m very willing to do it for you, but once again, it’s better on both sides to try to exchange good things than to do them too hastily. The artistic gentleman who was in your letter, who resembles me — is that me or somebody else?  He certainly looks like me as far as the face is concerned, but in the first place I’m always smoking a pipe, and then, having vertigo, I have an unspeakable horror of sitting like that on sheer crags beside the sea. So if that’s meant to be my portrait, I protest against the above-mentioned improbabilities. 
   The decoration of the house absorbs me terribly. I dare to believe that it would be quite to your liking, although it’s very different from what you do, of course. But just as you spoke to me in the past about paintings that would depict, one flowers, the other trees, the other fields. Well, I have the Poet’s garden (2 canvases) (among the croquis you have the first idea for it, after a smaller painted study that’s already at my brother’s). Then The starry night, then The vineyard, then The furrows, then the view of the house could be called The street, so unintentionally there’s a certain sequence. Well, I’ll be very very curious to see studies of Pont-Aven. But for yourself, give me something fairly worked up. It will work out, anyway, because I like your talent so much that I’d be very pleased to make a small collection of your works, bit by bit. For a long time I’ve been touched by the fact that Japanese artists very often made exchanges among themselves. It clearly proves that they liked one another and stuck together, and that there was a certain harmony among them and that they did indeed live a kind of brotherly life, in a natural way and not in the midst of intrigues. The more we resemble them in that respect, the better it will be for us. It seems, too, that those Japanese earned very little money and lived like simple labourers. I have the reproduction (Bing publication) of a Japanese drawing: A single blade of grass. What an example of awareness — you’ll see it one day. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard. The consignment Gauguin and you sent arrived at almost the same time as my studies went off. I was delighted, it really warmed my heart to see the two faces again. As for your portrait — you know — I like it very much — actually I like everything that you do, as you know — and perhaps nobody before me has liked what you do as much as I do. I really urge you to study the portrait; make as many as possible and don’t give up – later we’ll have to attract the public through portraits — in my view that’s where the future lies. But let’s not get sidetracked into hypotheses now. Because it’s up to us next to thank you for the collection of rough sketches entitled At the brothel. Bravo! The woman washing herself and the one who says ‘I’m second to none when it comes to taking it out of a man’3 are the best, it seems to me. The others are grimacing too much — and most of all, are too vague, too little flesh and bone properly built up. It doesn’t matter; it’s already something altogether new and interesting, and the rest, too – at the brothel — yes, that’s what needs to be done, and I assure you that I for one almost envy you this bloody good opportunity you have to go in there in uniform. Which those good little women adore. The poem at the end is really beautiful; stands up better than some of the figures. What you want, and what you say you believe, you say well and resonantly. Write to me when you’re going to be in Paris — the thing is that I’ve already written you a thousand times that my night café isn’t a brothel, it’s a café where night prowlers cease to be night prowlers, since, slumped over tables, they spend the whole night there without prowling at all. Occasionally a whore brings her fellow there. But arriving there one night I came across a little group 
   of a pimp and a whore who were making up after a quarrel. The woman was pretending to be indifferent and haughty, the man was tender. I started to paint it for you from memory — on a little no. 4 or no. 66 canvas — now if you’re leaving soon — I’ll send it to you in Paris; if you’re staying longer, say so, I’ll send it to you in Pont-Aven. I couldn’t add it to the consignment, it was nowhere near dry enough. But I don’t want to sign this study, because I never work from memory — there will be colour in it, which will suit you, but to repeat, here I’m doing a study for you that I would prefer not to do. I mercilessly destroyed an important canvas — a Christ with the angel in Gethsemane — as well as another one depicting the poet with a starry sky — because the form hadn’t been studied from the model beforehand, necessary in such cases7 — despite the fact that the colour was right. If the study I’m sending you in exchange doesn’t suit you, just look at it a little longer. I had the devil’s own job to do it with an irritating mistral8 (like the study in red and green, as well). Well, despite the fact that it wasn’t painted as fluently as the old mill10 — it’s more delicate and more intimate. You see that all of this is perhaps not at all — Impressionist – well, too bad, I can’t do anything about it — but I do what I do with an abandonment to reality, without thinking about this or that. Goes without saying that if you preferred another study from the batch to the Men unloading sand, you could take it and remove my dedication11 if someone else wants it. But I believe that that one will suit you once you’ve looked at it a little longer. 
   If Laval, Moret and the other one12 agree to make exchanges with me, perfect, but on my side I’d be especially satisfied if they wanted to do their portraits for me. You know, Bernard, it always seems to me that if I want to do studies of brothels I’d need more money than I have; I’m not young or womanizer enough13 for them to pose for me for free. And I can’t work without a model. I’m not saying that I don’t flatly turn my back on reality to turn a study into a painting — by arranging the colour, by enlarging, by simplifying — but I have such a fear of separating myself from what’s possible and what’s right as far as form is concerned. Later, after another ten years of studies, all right, but in very truth I have so much curiosity for what’s possible and what really exists that I have so little desire or courage to search for the ideal, in so far as it could result from my abstract studies. Others may have more clarity of mind than I for abstract studies — and you might certainly be among them, as well as Gauguin and perhaps myself when I’m old. But in the meantime I’m still living off the real world. I exaggerate, I sometimes make changes to the subject, but still I don’t invent the whole of the painting; on the contrary, I find it ready-made — but to be untangled — in the real world. 
   But you’ll probably find these studies ugly, I don’t know. In any case, neither you nor anyone else should do an exchange grudgingly.  My brother writes that Anquetin’s back in Paris;14 I’m curious to know what he’s made. When you see him you’ll give him my warm regards. The house will seem more lived-in now that I’ll see the portraits in it. How happy I would be to see you there yourself this winter; it’s true that the trip costs rather a lot. Nevertheless, may one not risk those expenses by taking one’s revenge by working? Work’s so difficult in the north in winter. Here too, perhaps; I’ve hardly had the experience yet and it remains to be seen. But it’s damned useful to see the south, where life is lived more in the open air, in order to understand the Japanese better. And that touch of the haughty and the noble that certain places have down here will suit your book very well. In the Red sunset, the Sun should be imagined higher, outside the painting, let’s say just at the level of the frame. Because it so happens that an hour, an hour and a half before it sets, the things on the earth still keep their colours like that. Later the blue and the violet colour them darker, as soon as the sun sends out rays that are more horizontal. Thanks once again for what you sent me, it really warmed my heart. And a good handshake in thought, and write to me the day of your departure so that I know when you’ll be in Paris; address in Paris still avenue de Beaulieu 5, isn’t it? Ever yours, Vincent My dear Gauguin, Thanks for your letter, and thanks most of all for your promise to come as early as the twentieth. Agreed, this reason that you give2 won’t help to make a pleasure trip of the train journey, and it’s only right that you should put off your journey until you can do it without it being a bloody nuisance. But that apart, I almost envy you this trip, which will show you, en passant, miles and miles of countryside of different kinds with autumn splendours. I still have in my memory the feelings that the journey from Paris to Arles gave me this past winter. How I watched out to see ‘if it was like Japan yet’! Childish, isn’t it? Look here, I wrote to you the other day that my vision was strangely tired. Well, I rested for two and a half days, and then I got back to work. But not yet daring to go outside, I did, for my decoration once again, a no. 30 canvas of my bedroom5 with the whitewood furniture that you know. 
   Ah, well, it amused me enormously doing this bare interior.  With a simplicity à la Seurat.  In flat tints, but coarsely brushed in full impasto, the walls pale lilac, the floor in a broken and faded red, the chairs and the bed chrome yellow, the pillows and the sheet very pale lemon green, the blanket blood-red, the dressing-table orange, the washbasin blue, the window green. I had wished to express utter repose with all these very different tones, you see, among which the only white is the little note given by the mirror with a black frame (to cram in the fourth pair of complementaries as well). Anyway, you’ll see it with the others, and we’ll talk about it. Because I often don’t 
   know what I’m doing, working almost like a sleepwalker. It’s beginning to get cold, especially on the days when the mistral blows. I’ve had gas put in the studio, so that we’ll have good light in winter. Perhaps you’ll be disillusioned with Arles if you come at a time when the mistral’s blowing, but wait... It’s in the long term that the poetry down here soaks in. You won’t find the house as comfortable yet as we’ll gradually try to make it. There are so many expenses, and it can’t be done in one go. Anyway, I believe that once here, like me, you’ll be seized with a fury to paint the autumn effects, in between spells of the mistral. And that you’ll understand that I’ve insisted that you come now that there are some very beautiful days. Au revoir, then. Ever yours, Vincent My dear old Bernard, We’ve done a great deal of work these past few days, and in the meantime I’ve read Zola’s Le rêve, so I’ve hardly had time to write.  Gauguin interests me greatly as a man — greatly. For a long time it has seemed to me that in our filthy job as painters we have the greatest need of people with the hands and stomach of a labourer. More natural tastes — more amorous and benevolent temperaments — than the decadent and exhausted Parisian man-about-town.  Now here, without the slightest doubt, we’re in the presence of an unspoiled creature with the instincts of a wild beast. With Gauguin, blood and sex have the edge over ambition. But enough of that, you’ve seen him close at hand longer than I have, just wanted to tell you first impressions in a few words. Next, I don’t think it will astonish you greatly if I tell you that our discussions are tending to deal with the terrific subject of an association of certain painters. 
   Ought or may this association have a commercial character, yes or no? We haven’t reached any result yet, and haven’t so much as set foot on a new continent yet. Now I, who have a presentiment of a new world, who certainly believe in the possibility of a great renaissance of art. Who believe that this new art will have the tropics for its homeland. It seems to me that we ourselves are serving only as intermediaries. And that it will only be a subsequent generation that will succeed in living in peace. Anyway, all that, our duties and our possibilities for action could become clearer to us only through actual experience.  I was a little surprised not yet to have received the studies that you promised in exchange for mine. Now something that will interest you — we’ve made some excursions in the brothels, and it’s likely that we’ll eventually go there often to work. At the moment Gauguin has a canvas in progress of the same 
   night café that I also painted, but with figures seen in the brothels. It promises to become a beautiful thing. I’ve made two studies of falling leaves in an avenue of poplars, and a third study of the whole of this avenue, entirely yellow. I declare I don’t understand why I don’t do figure studies, while theoretically it’s sometimes so difficult for me to imagine the painting of the future as anything other than a new series of powerful portraitists, simple and comprehensible to the whole of the general public. Anyway, perhaps I’ll soon get down to doing brothels. I’ll leave a page for Gauguin, who will probably also write to you, and I shake your hand firmly in thought. Ever yours, Vincent Milliet the 2nd lieut. Zouaves has left for Africa, and would be very glad if you were to write to him one of these days.  You will indeed do well to write him what your intentions are, so that he could take steps beforehand to 
   prepare the way for you. Mr Milliet, second lieutenant of Zouaves, Guelma, Africa. Don’t listen to Vincent; as you know, he’s prone to admire and ditto to be indulgent. His idea about the future of a new generation in the tropics seems absolutely right to me as a painter, and I still intend going back there when I find the funds. A little bit of luck, who knows? Vincent has done two studies of falling leaves in an avenue, which are in my room and which you would like very much. On very coarse, but very good sacking. Send news of yourself and of all the pals. Yours, Paul Gauguin  My dear sister, One thing that has given me great pleasure is that I’ve finally received a reply from Mrs Mauve. As I want to write to her one of these days I’d ask you to send me her current address immediately and without error. Her letter was dated from The Hague, but she doesn’t say if she’ll stay there; personally I thought she was still living in Laren. She says she’s also had a nice letter from you. I received your letter dated from Middelharnis, and I thank you very much for it. It’s good that you’ve at last begun to read Au bonheur des dames &c. There are so many things in it, as there are in Guy de Maupassant as well. I’ve already replied to you that I didn’t like Mother’s portrait enormously. I’ve now just painted a reminiscence of the garden at Etten, to put in my bedroom, and here’s a croquis of it. It’s quite a big canvas.  
   Now here are the colours. The younger of the two women walking is wearing a Scottish shawl with green and orange checks and carrying a red parasol. The old one has a blue-violet shawl, almost black. But a bunch of dahlias, some lemon yellow, others variegated pink and white, explode against this sombre figure. Behind them a few emerald-green cedar or cypress bushes. Behind these cypresses one catches a glimpse of a bed of pale green and red cabbages, surrounded by a border of little white flowers. The sandy path is a raw orange, the foliage of two beds of scarlet geraniums is very green. Finally, in the middle ground is a maidservant dressed in blue who’s arranging plants with a profusion of white, pink, yellow and vermilion-red flowers. There you are, I know it isn’t perhaps much of a resemblance, but for me it conveys the poetic character and the style of the garden as I feel them. 
   In the same way, let’s suppose that these two women walking are you and our mother. Let’s even suppose then that there may be not the slightest, absolutely not the slightest vulgar and fatuous resemblance, the deliberate choice of colour, the dark violet violently blotched with the lemon yellow of the dahlias, suggests Mother’s personality to me. The figure in the Scottish plaid with the orange and green checks standing out against the dark green of the cypress, this contrast even more exaggerated by the red parasol, gives me an idea of you, vaguely a figure like those in Dickens’s novels. I don’t know if you’ll understand that one can speak poetry just by arranging colours well, just as one can say comforting things in music. In the same way the bizarre lines, sought out and multiplied, and snaking all over the painting, aren’t intended to render the garden in its vulgar resemblance but draw it for us as if seen in a dream, in character and yet at the same time stranger than the reality. I’ve now also painted a woman reading a novel.  Abundant very black hair, a green bodice, sleeves the colour of wine lees, the skirt black, the background completely yellow, library shelves with books. She’s holding a yellow book in her hand.
   That’s all for today. But I remember that I haven’t yet told you that my friend Paul Gauguin, an Impressionist painter, now lives with me and that we’re very happy together, he encourages me a lot often to work purely from the imagination. Give Mother my warm regards, and write without fail and by return with Mrs Mauve’s address. I kiss you and Mother in thought. Ever yours, Vincent  Sir – I shall add a few words to your brother’s letter to reassure you, in my turn, on his account. I am happy to tell you that my predictions have been borne out, and that this over-excitement was only fleeting. I strongly believe that he will have recovered in a few days’ time. I very much wanted him to write to you himself, to give you a better account of his condition. I have had him brought down to my office to talk a little. It will entertain me and do him good. With my sincerest regards.  Rey F. My dear friend Gauguin I’m taking advantage of my first trip out of the hospital to write you a few most sincere and profound words of friendship. I have thought of you a great deal in the hospital, and even in the midst of fever and relative weakness. Tell me. Was my brother Theo’s journey really necessary – my friend? Now at least reassure him completely, and yourself, please. Trust that in fact no evil exists in this best of worlds, where everything is always for the best.
   So I want you to give my warm regards to good Schuffenecker – to refrain from saying bad things about our poor little yellow house until more mature reflection on either side – to give my regards to the painters I saw in Paris. I wish you prosperity in Paris. With a good handshake Ever yours, Vincent Roulin has been really kind to me, it was he who had the presence of mind to get me out of there before the others were convinced. Please reply. Arles, 7 January 89 Dearest mother and sister, For a couple of weeks now it has been my firm intention to drop you a line to wish you a prosperous and happy New Year. I’m perhaps a little late for that now. You’ll probably forgive me for this when I tell you that I’ve been indisposed, and in December at that. But can tell you at the same time that I’m completely recovered and back to my normal routine and work. Although we have winter here too and, what’s worse, the countryside is partly flooded, all the same we have a good deal milder weather at times than you do in Holland. Would you be so good as to take note that I’m dropping you this line in case Theo should have told you something about my being indisposed for a few days. 
   I hope that he understood of his own accord that it wasn’t worthwhile telling you about it. But so that there can’t be any worrying about it, or any question of it, I’m writing to you myself. I’ve also deliberately put off replying to Jet Mauve, which I hope to do very soon, though, and thank Wil very much for her last letter. I acquired quite a few acquaintances here just at the time I wasn’t well, and will probably get several portraits to do. I do hope all is going well with all of you, particularly your health. As for me, precisely because I’ve been unwell for a few days I’m actually very refreshed, and have a chance of not having anything else wrong for a very long time. 
   Meanwhile, it would please me very greatly if I were to get a letter from you one of these days. Although it’s still somewhat in the future, you’ll already be thinking about Theo’s visit all the same. It wouldn’t really surprise me if he came rather earlier than usual this year, that’s to say before the exhibition instead of after it. But he’ll have to act as circumstances dictate. I couldn’t help thinking about you quite a lot these days, be assured of that and believe me Your loving Vincent My dear friend Gauguin, Thanks for your letter. Left behind alone on board my little yellow house — as it was perhaps my duty to be the last to remain here anyway — I’m not a little plagued by the friends’ departure. Roulin has had his transfer to Marseille and has just left. It has been touching to see him these last days with little Marcelle, when he made her laugh and bounce on his knees. His transfer necessitates his separation from his family, and you won’t be surprised that as a result the man you and I simultaneously nicknamed ‘the passer-by’ one evening had a very heavy heart. Now so did I, witnessing that and other heart-breaking things. His voice as he sang for his child took on a strange timbre in which there was a hint of a woman rocking a cradle or a distressed wet-nurse, and then another sound of bronze, like a clarion from France. Now I feel remorse at having perhaps, I who so insisted that you should stay here to await events and gave you so many good reasons for doing so, now I feel remorse at having indeed perhaps prompted your departure — unless, however, that departure was premeditated beforehand? And that then it was perhaps up to me to show that I still had the right to be kept frankly au courant.
   Whatever the case, I hope we like each other enough to be able to begin again if need be, if penury, alas ever-present for us artists without capital, should necessitate such a measure. You talk to me in your letter about a canvas of mine, the sunflowers with a yellow background3 — to say that it would give you some pleasure to receive it. I don’t think that you’ve made a bad choice – if Jeannin has the peony, Quost the hollyhock, I indeed, before others, have taken the sunflower. I think that I’ll begin by returning what belongs to you, making it plain that it’s my intention, after what has happened, to contest categorically your right to the canvas in question. But as I commend your intelligence in the choice of that canvas I’ll make an effort to paint two of them, exactly the same. In which case it might be done once and for all and thus settled amicably, 
   so that you could have your own all the same. Today I made a fresh start on the canvas I had painted of Mrs Roulin, the one which had remained in a vague state as regards the hands because of my accident. As an arrangement of colours: the reds moving through to pure oranges, intensifying even more in the flesh tones up to the chromes, passing into the pinks and marrying with the olive and Veronese greens. As an Impressionist arrangement of colours, I’ve never devised anything better. And I believe that if one placed this canvas just as it is in a boat, even one of Icelandic fishermen, there would be some who would feel the lullaby in it. Ah! my dear friend, to make of painting what the music of Berlioz and Wagner has been before us... a consolatory art for distressed hearts!6 There are as yet only a few who feel it as you and I do!!! 
   My brother understands you well, and when he tells me that you’re a kind of unfortunate like me, then that indeed proves that he understands us. I’ll send you your things, but at times weakness overcomes me again, and then I can’t even make the gesture of sending you back your things. I’ll pluck up the courage in a few days. And the ‘fencing masks and gloves’ (make the very least possible use of less childish engines of war), those terrible engines of war will wait until then. I now write to you very calmly, but I haven’t yet been able to pack up all the rest. In my mental or nervous fever or madness, I don’t know quite what to say or how to name it, my thoughts sailed over many seas. I even dreamed of the Dutch ghost ship8 and the Horla, and it seems that I sang then, I who can’t sing on other occasions, to be precise an old wet-nurse’s song while thinking of what the cradle-rocker sang as she rocked the sailors and whom I had sought in an arrangement of colours before falling ill. Not knowing the music of Berlioz. A heartfelt handshake. Ever yours, Vincent It will please me greatly if you write to me again before long. Have you read Tartarin11 in full by now? The imagination of the south creates pals, doesn’t it, and between us we always have friendship. Have you yet read and re-read Uncle Tom’s cabin by Beecher Stowe? It’s perhaps not very well written in the literary sense. Have you read Germinie Lacerteux13 yet? My dear friend Koning, Thank you for sending me New Year’s greetings from the far north of our old native country. I received your postcard in the hospital in Arles, where I was quartered at the time because of an attack of brain or some other fever that had already pretty much passed off. And as regards the causes and effects of the illness in question, we’ll do best to leave it to possible discussions by the Dutch catechists as to whether or not I have been or still am — mad, fancy myself mad, or regarded as mad in a flight of fancy consisting only of sculpture. And if not, whether I already was before that time;2 am or am not at present, or will be hereafter. Having thus informed you more than enough about my mental and physical state... it will appear less odd to you that I didn’t reply to you sooner. 
   But meanwhile we mustn’t forget to stick to our guns. And starting from there, I ask you: what are you doing in painting at the moment, and how are you working with colour? I’ve seen absolutely nothing of your studies sent to Theo (I believe), despite urging you to make an exchange. Is this to do with Theo, who possibly had other things on his mind, or with the not inconsiderable distance between us? Did you know that Theo is engaged and will marry an Amsterdam girl quite soon? After this question about your work, a few words about mine. At present I have a portrait of a woman on the go, or rather on the easel. Which I’ve called ‘la berceuse’, or as we say in Dutch with Van Eeden (you know, who wrote that book I got you to read) — or 
   would simply call in Van Eeden’s Dutch ‘our lullaby’, or the woman by the cradle. It’s a woman dressed in green (bust olive green and the skirt pale Veronese green). Her hair is entirely orange and in plaits. The complexion worked up in chrome yellow, with a few broken tones, of course, in order to model. The hands that hold the cradle cord ditto ditto. The background is vermilion at the bottom (simply representing a tiled floor or brick floor). The wall is covered with wallpaper, obviously calculated by me in connection with the rest of the colours. This wallpaper is blue-green with pink dahlias and dotted with orange and with ultramarine. I believe I’ve run fairly parallel to Van Eeden in this, and consequently don’t regard his style of writing as unparallel to my style of painting in the matter of colour. Whether I’ve actually sung a lullaby with colour I leave to the critics, particularly to those aforementioned. But we’ve talked enough about this in the past, haven’t we? About the eternal question of colour that guides us, in so far as our composure can go. 
   In any event, on leaving the hospital I painted my own doctor’s portrait. And haven’t yet altogether lost my equilibrium as a painter. But obviously I’ve painted a lot more other studies or paintings in all this time. Among other things this summer, two flower-pieces with nothing but Sunflowers in a yellow earthenware pot. Painted with the three chrome yellows, yellow ochre and Veronese green and nothing else. For the time being I’m still in Arles and at your disposal for further correspondence by letter or painted study. Theo went to see Breitner recently, and said of his work that he thought Breitner the best painter and thinker among you over there. Regards, my dear friend, with a handshake in thought. Your friend Vincent Address still 2 Place Lamartine Arles. If you see Breitner, you may let him read this epistle or tell him about it just as I write it, without bringing too much of your own imagination into play. My dear friend Signac, Thanks very much for your postcard, which gives me news of you. As for my brother not having replied to your letter yet, I’m inclined to believe that it’s not his fault. I’ve also been without news of him for a fortnight. It’s because he’s in Holland, where he’s getting married one of these days. Now, while not denying the advantages of a marriage in the very least, once it has been done and one is quietly set up in one’s home, the funereal pomp of the reception &c., the lamentable congratulations of two families (even civilized) at the same time, not to mention the fortuitous appearances in those pharmacist’s jars where antediluvian civil or religious magistrates sit – my word – isn’t there good reason to pity the poor unfortunate obliged to present himself armed with the requisite papers in the places where, with a ferocity unequalled by the cruellest cannibals, you’re married alive on the low heat of the aforementioned funereal receptions. 
   I remain much obliged to you for your most friendly and beneficial visit, which considerably contributed to cheering me up. I am well now and I’m working in the hospital or its surroundings. Thus I’ve just brought back two studies of orchards.  Here’s a hasty croquis of them – the largest is a poor green countryside with little cottages, blue line of the Alpilles, white and blue sky. The foreground, enclosures with reed hedges where little peach trees are in blossom – everything there is small, the gardens, the fields, the gardens, the trees, even those mountains, as in certain Japanese landscapes, that’s why this subject attracted me. The other landscape is almost all green with a little lilac and grey – on a rainy day. Very pleased to hear you say that you’ve settled down, and will very much wish to have more news of you. How is work going, what is the character of those parts? 
    
   Since then my mind has returned yet more to the normal state, for the time being I don’t ask for better, provided it lasts. That will depend above all on a very sober regime. For the first few months, at least, I plan to go on staying here. I’ve rented an apartment consisting of two very small rooms. But at times it isn’t completely convenient for me to start living again, for I still have inner despairs of quite a large calibre. My word, these anxieties... who can live in modern life without catching his share of them? The best consolation, if not the only remedy, is, it still seems to me, profound friendships, even if these have the disadvantage of anchoring us in life more solidly than may appear desirable to us in the days of great suffering. Thank you again for your visit, which gave me so much pleasure. Good handshake in thought. Yours truly, Vincent Address until end of April, place Lamartine 2, Arles. My dear sister, Your kind letter really touched me, especially since it tells me that you’ve returned to care for Mrs du Quesne. Certainly cancer is a terrible illness, as for me, I always shiver when I see a case – and it isn’t rare in the south, although often it’s not the real incurable, mortal cancer but cancerous abscesses from which one sometimes recovers. Whatever the case, you’re very brave, my sister, not to recoil before these Gethsemanes. And I feel less brave than you when I think of these things, feeling awkward, heavy and clumsy in them. We have, if my memory serves, a Dutch proverb to this effect: they aren’t the worst fruits that wasps gnaw at... This leads me straight to what I wanted to say, ivy loves the old lopped willows each spring, ivy loves the trunk of the old oak tree – and so cancer, that mysterious plant, attaches itself so often to people whose lives were nothing but ardent love and devotion. So, however terrible the mystery of these pains may be, the horror of them is sacred, and in them there might indeed be a gentle, heartbreaking thing, just as we see the green moss in abundance on the old thatched roof. However, I don’t know anything about it – I have no right to assert anything. Not very far from here there’s a very, very, very ancient tomb, more ancient than Christ, on which this is inscribed, ‘Blessed be Thebe, daughter of Telhui, priestess of Osiris, who never complained about anyone.’2 I couldn’t help thinking of that when you told me in your previous letter that the sick lady you’re caring for didn’t complain. 
   Mother must be pleased with Theo’s marriage, and he writes to me that she looks as if she’s getting younger. That pleases me greatly. Now he too is very pleased with his matrimonial experiences, and is considerably reassured. He has so few illusions about it, having to a rare degree the strength of character to take things as they are without making pronouncements about good and evil. In which he’s quite right, for what do we know of what we do? As for me, I’m going for at least 3 months into an asylum at St-Rémy, not far from here. In all I’ve had 4 big crises in which I hadn’t the slightest idea of what I said, wanted, did. Not counting that I fainted 3 times previously without plausible reason, and not retaining the least memory of what I felt then. Ah well, that’s quite serious, although I’m much calmer since then, and physically I’m perfectly well. And I still feel incapable of taking a studio again. I’m working though, and have just done two paintings of the hospital. One is a ward, a very long ward with the rows of beds with white curtains where a few figures of patients are moving. 
   The walls, the ceiling with the large beams, everything is white in a lilac white or green white. Here and there a window with a pink or bright green curtain. The floor tiled with red bricks. At the far end a door surmounted by a crucifix. It’s very, very simple. And then, as a pendant, the inner courtyard. It’s an arcaded gallery like in Arab buildings, whitewashed. In front of these galleries an ancient garden with a pond in the middle and 8 beds of flowers, forget-me-nots, Christmas roses, anemones, buttercups, wallflowers, daisies &c. And beneath the gallery, orange trees and oleanders. So it’s a painting chock-full of flowers and springtime greenery. However, three black, sad tree-trunks cross it like snakes, and in the foreground four large sad, dark box bushes. The people here probably don’t see much in it, but however it has always been so much my desire to paint for those who don’t know the artistic side of a painting. What shall I say to you, you don’t know the reasonings of good père Pangloss in Voltaire’s Candide, nor Flaubert’s Bouvard et Pécuchet. These are books from man to man, and I don’t know if women understand that. But the memory of that often sustains me in the uncomfortable and unenviable hours and days or nights. 
   I’ve re-read Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom with extreme attention precisely because it’s a woman’s book, written, she says, while making soup for her children, and then also with extreme attention C. Dickens’s Christmas Tales. I read little so as to think about it more. It’s very likely that I have a lot more to suffer. And that doesn’t suit me at all, to tell you the truth, for I wouldn’t wish for a martyr’s career in any circumstances. For I’ve always sought something other than the heroism I don’t have, which I certainly admire in others but which, I repeat, I do not believe to be my duty or my ideal. I haven’t re-read those excellent books by Renan11 but how often I think of them here, where we have the olive trees and other characteristic plants and the blue sky. Ah, how right Renan is and what a fine work his is, to speak to us in a French like no other person speaks. A French in which, in the sound of the words, there’s the blue sky and the gentle rustling of the olive trees and a thousand true and explanatory things in short that turn his history into a resurrection. It’s one of the saddest things I know, the prejudices of people who through bias oppose so many good and beautiful things that have been created in our time. Ah, the eternal ‘ignorance’, the eternal ‘misunderstandings’, and how much good it then does to happen upon words that are truly Serene... Blessed be Thebe – daughter of Telhui – priestess of Osiris – who never complained about anyone. 
   For myself, I quite often worry that my life hasn’t been calm enough, all these disappointments, annoyances, changes mean that I don’t develop naturally and in full in my artistic career. ‘A rolling stone gathers no moss’12 they say, don’t they? But what does that matter if, as rightly the above-mentioned père Pangloss alone proves, ‘everything is always for the best in the best of worlds’. Last year I did about ten or a dozen orchards in blossom13 and this year I have only four, so work isn’t going with much gusto. If you have the Drône book15 you speak of I’d very much like to read it, but do me the pleasure of not buying it especially for me at the moment. I’ve seen some very interesting nuns here, the majority of the priests seem to me to be in a sad state. Religion has frightened me so much for so many years now. For example, do you happen to know that love perhaps doesn’t exist exactly as one imagines it – the junior doctor here, the worthiest man one could possibly imagine, the most dedicated, the most valiant, a warm, manly heart, sometimes amuses himself mystifying the little women by telling them that love is also a microbe. Although then the little women, and even a few men, let out loud shouts, he doesn’t care at all and is imperturbable on that point.
   As for kissing and all the rest that it pleases us to add to it, that’s just a natural kind of act like drinking a glass of water or eating a piece of bread. Certainly it’s quite indispensable to kiss, otherwise serious disorders arise. Now must cerebral sympathies always go with or without what precedes. Why regulate all that, eh, what’s the use? For myself I’m not opposed to love being a microbe, and even so that wouldn’t prevent me at all from feeling things such as respect before the pains of cancer for example. And do you see, the doctors of whom you say, sometimes they can’t do very much (which I leave you free to say as much as you consider right) – very well – do you know what they can do all the same – they give you a more cordial handshake, gentler than many other hands, and their presence can really be very pleasant and reassuring sometimes. There you are, I’m letting myself go on and on. Yet often I can’t write two lines, and I really fear that my ideas may be futile or incoherent this time too. Only I wanted to write to you in any case while you were there. I can’t precisely describe what the thing I have is like, there are terrible fits of anxiety sometimes – without any apparent cause – or then again a feeling of emptiness and fatigue in the mind. 
   I consider the whole rather as a simple accident, no doubt a large part of it is my fault, and from time to time I have fits of melancholy, atrocious remorse, but you see, when that’s going to discourage me completely and make me gloomy, I’m not exactly embarrassed to say that remorse and fault are possibly microbes too, just like love. Every day I take the remedy that the incomparable Dickens prescribes against suicide. It consists of a glass of wine, a piece of bread and cheese and a pipe of tobacco. It isn’t complicated, you’ll tell me, and you don’t think that my melancholy comes close to that place, however at moments – ah but... Anyway, it isn’t always pleasant, but I try not to forget completely how to jest, I try to avoid everything that might relate to heroism and martyrdom, in short I try not to take lugubrious things lugubriously. Now I wish you good-night, and my respects to your patient, although I don’t know her. Ever yours, Vincent I don’t know if Lies is in Soesterberg at the moment, if she’s there, kind regards from me. My dear sister, If I didn’t write to you quickly this Sunday morning while the canvases I’ve begun are drying a little in the sun, I would wait even longer to answer your kind letter. I hope that you’re well, and Mother too, I think of you two very often, I was scarcely able to foresee, when I went from Nuenen to Antwerp, that the course of events would keep me away for so long and at such a distance. That’s perhaps why my thoughts often still stray involuntarily to those parts, and it seems to me then that I’m continuing the same work left unfinished there, when so many things in nature remain parallel. Although I feel with an obstinate ingratitude that my health is returning little by little, the fact is that I am well; but as I tell you, the desire to begin again, the joy of living, is hardly great. I’ve just finished a landscape of an olive grove with grey foliage more or less like that of the willows, their cast shadows violet on the sun-drenched sand. Then yet another that depicts a field of yellowing wheat surrounded by brambles and green bushes. At the end of the field a little pink house with a tall and dark cypress tree that stands out against the distant purplish and bluish hills, and against a forget-me-not blue sky streaked with pink 
   whose pure tones contrast with the already heavy, scorched ears, whose tones are as warm as the crust of a loaf of bread. I have yet another in which a field of wheat on the slope of the hills is completely ravaged and knocked to the ground by a downpour, and which is drenched by the torrential shower. It seems to me that the people here work a lot less than the peasants in our country, one scarcely sees any cattle, and the countryside almost always has more of a deserted look than it does at home. This seems most deplorable to me, all the more so since nature isn’t ungenerous and the air is so pure and so healthy. So one would wish to see a more energetic race of people here. The cases aren’t perhaps rare here where doing nothing becomes doing bad. In the north, aren’t there heaps of honest workmen without enough bread because there one works so much that work is no longer valued? I don’t say that this is always the case, but anyway there’s something of that kind however. Ah well, the farms here could produce three times what they do if they were well-kept, and the whole land if it was manured. By producing three times as much, the land here could thus feed a lot more people. Now I think you asked me if, still supposing that love is a bacillus4 (which I myself am not in a position to state or prove, please don’t lose sight of that), I think that you asked me 
   if there are people who would have the said bacillus and others who wouldn’t have it, or if on the contrary it was a fatal and universal illness. On that point, too, I’m rather unqualified to form a clearly well-founded opinion. But I consider it probable that if a person, yourself say, is convinced she didn’t have it, it would perhaps be wise for such a person to have herself inoculated with the said bacillus according to the Pasteur5 or some other method. Joking apart, I believe that a man or woman inevitably has to be in love with something, and that the only precaution one can take would be to fall in love in such and such a way and not in another one, according to one’s ideas. And to know what one wants in such matters – alas we know ourselves so little. Besides, I’d almost think that women take the offensive in these matters; that the wise ones among them, or rather those who have the most correct and sure instinct, don’t wait to be loved in order to love themselves – which – and I’m inclined to believe for good reasons – would appear to be the essential thing to them. Anyway, it could very well be that by being inoculated with the attenuated bacillus, of the well-chosen virus and in the correct dose, one would be better protected from contagion. If one doesn’t yet have the illness one doesn’t prevent oneself perhaps getting it, while when one has it one can no longer catch it. I’m quite curious to have some news of Theo, who appears pretty absorbed in his honeymoon, which is very good. He sent me some colours and canvas last week, but it will soon be a month since I had news of him by letter.
   It’s a great consolation for me to know that he no longer lives alone. His wife wrote me a very nice letter a while ago, which proved to me that she’s really serious. She’ll certainly still need this, and for a long time to come, for Theo’s life is quite complicated because of his duty towards Boussod & Co. And as for her, she’ll learn more to live with him than without him, without being obliged to change too much and forget what she already knows of Dutch things. I’m going off to work a little more, so as I finish I wish you and Mother all good fortune and health. I kiss you affectionately in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear sister, In recent days I already began another letter in reply to yours, but I became aware that I didn’t have sufficient mastery of my mind to write. I thank you and Lies for the Rod book1 which I’ve finished and which I’ll return to you soon. The terrible title, Le sens de la vie, terrified me a little, but as it’s happily scarcely spoken of in this volume, I was quite content to read something which has a family resemblance to Souvestre’s Le philosophe sous les toits2 or with Monsieur, madame et bébé by Droz. The moral of it is that in some cases a gentleman ends up preferring to live with a nice, devoted wife and his child, to the life of the restaurant, boulevard and café which he had previously led without too much excess. That’s undoubtedly very pleasant. It is indeed remarkable that good Mrs du Quesne’s illness came to an unexpected end after all. It must have been a day of great deliverance for her all the same. If you say in your letter that when you see so many others in life who come and go, seeking their own path, appearing to you perhaps to be making more headway than you, what can I tell you, that I too sometimes have a feeling of stupefaction in the face of my own life, and as regards several other lives of workers in my profession besides. I’ve just sent Theo a dozen drawings after canvases which I have on the go, while all the rest of my life is absolutely as inept as it was at the time when, at the age of 12, I was at a boarding school where I learned absolutely nothing. An enormous number of painters who certainly couldn’t do my 12 canvases either in 2 months or in 12 are regarded as artists and as intelligent people in town or in the countryside. But believe me, I say this in order to be explanatory and not because I would see any urgency or possibility or desire to change things. We scarcely know life, we’re so unaware of its hidden aspects, anyway we’re living in an age when everything appears to be in its dotage and tottering, and it isn’t unfortunate to find a duty which forces us to stay calmly in our corner, occupied with a little simpler toil, with certain duties that retain some raison d’être.
   In these days in which we live we risk coming back from a battle ashamed of having done battle. So my friend who was with me in Arles7 and a few others have thus organized an exhibition in which, in good health, I would have taken part. And what have they been able to do – almost nothing – and yet in their canvases there was something brand new, good, something to give me pleasure and make me enthusiastic for example, me, I can assure you of that. Among artists, we no longer know what to say to each other, we don’t know if we ought to laugh or cry about it, and doing, my word, neither one thing or the other, we are happiest when we find ourselves in possession of a little paint and canvas, the thing we also lack sometimes and which at least we can work on. But any idea of a regular life, any idea of awakening in ourselves or in others gentle ideas or sensations, all of this must necessarily appear pure utopia to us. So although yesterday more than half a million francs were paid for Millet’s Angelus, don’t go believing that more souls will feel what was in Millet’s soul. Or that middle-class people or workers will begin to put in their houses the lithograph of that Millet Angelus, for example. Don’t go believing that the painters who are still working in Brittany among the peasants will have more encouragement for that matter, less of the same black famine that always surrounded Millet, above all more courage. Alas, we often lack breath and faith, wrongly certainly but – and here we come back to the point – if, however, we want to work we must submit both to the stubborn harshness of the time and to our isolation, which is sometimes as hard to bear as exile. Now before us, after our years which have thus been lost, relatively speaking, poverty, illness, old age, madness and always exile. It is indeed the moment to say ‘blessed be Thebe, daughter of Telhui, priestess of Osiris, who never complained about anyone’.
   Cherishing the memory of good people, wouldn’t that be worth more than being among the ambitious ones on the whole? I’m quite absorbed in reading the Shakespeare that Theo sent me here, where at last I’ll have the calm necessary to do a little more difficult reading. I’ve first taken the kings series, of which I’ve already read Richard II, Henry IV, Henry V and a part of Henry VI – as these dramas were the most unfamiliar to me. Have you ever read King Lear? But anyway, I think I shan’t urge you too much to read such dramatic books when I myself, returning from this reading, am always obliged to go and gaze at a blade of grass, a pine-tree branch, an ear of wheat, to calm myself. So if you want to do as artists do, gaze upon the white and red poppies with the bluish leaves, with those buds raising themselves up on stems with gracious curves. The hours of trouble and battle will assuredly come and find us without our going to look for them. The separation from Cor will be hard. And it’s going to happen really soon. What else can one do, thinking of all the things whose reason one doesn’t understand, but gaze upon the wheatfields. Their story is ours, for we who live on bread, are we not ourselves wheat to a considerable extent, at least ought we not to submit to growing, powerless to move, like a plant, relative to what our imagination sometimes desires, and to be reaped when we are ripe, as it is? I tell you, as for myself I think it would be wisest not to wish to get better, not to wish to regain more strength than now, and I’ll probably grow accustomed to it, to being cracked. A little sooner, a little later, what can that matter to me? What you write about Theo’s health I know completely, nevertheless it is my hope that married life will completely restore him. I believe his wife to be wise and loving enough to take lots of care of him and to see that he doesn’t just eat restaurant food, but that he gets back to 
   Dutch cooking. Dutch cooking is good, and so let her turn herself into something of a cook, let her take on a reassuring outer appearance, even if it’s a little rough. Theo himself is obliged to be a Parisian, but with that he absolutely needs what reminds him of his youth and his past. I, who have neither wife nor child, I need to see the wheatfields, and it would be difficult for me to exist in a town for long. So, knowing his character, I’m optimistic that his marriage will do him an enormous amount of good. Before we can form an idea of his health we must allow them a little time to take root within each other. And afterwards, I dare also hope, she’ll have found lots of ways to make his life a little more pleasant than was the case before. For he has seen hard times. Anyway I must close this letter if I want it to go off today, and I don’t even have time to re-read it. So, if I’ve said too many silly things you will kindly excuse me. Look after yourself, don’t get too bored, and by cultivating your garden12 as you do, and the rest that you do, be well assured that you’re getting through a lot of work. I kiss you affectionately in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. Dear Mother, If you say that you’re a mother approaching 70 then it must be true, but one would certainly not tell it from your writing, for it struck me that it’s exceptionally firm. What’s more, Theo and Wil wrote to me that you seem to be getting young again2 – and I think that’s very good and is sometimes needed in life. The news about Cor – no wonder you’re taken up with it and it will be hard on both sides to have to part. To my mind, though, he’s absolutely right not to hesitate to accept this position, since it seems that one can get through the world better and more happily at a distance from those great dung-heap cities, not only London, Paris, but Amsterdam, Rotterdam and so many others in Europe, than in their vicinity. There is more that’s natural in the world and good than one would suppose here in our continent. And I think Cor’s being consistent going there. I’ve often heard talk, not about the Transvaal precisely, but about Australia, for instance, by those who came from there and always longed to go back.
   The same about Haiti, say, about Martinique where Gauguin, who was with me in Arles, had been. And I dare suppose that the Transvaal will have one thing and another in common with Australia. Anyway, one has a chance to be able to develop and to be able to use one’s energy better than in the European circumlocution. Now, my dear mother, as regards the sorrow that we have and retain about parting and loss, it seems to me that it’s instinctive, that without it we wouldn’t be able to accept partings, and it will probably serve us on later occasions to recognize and find one another again. Things simply can’t stay in one place. And yet the apples never fall far from the tree, and stinging nettles won’t spring from their pips just yet. For the rest, though, I don’t know. I’ve had good reports from Theo and Jo; meanwhile it surprises me less than anyone that he’s coughing etc. Sometimes I wish they lived outside Paris and not on the 4th or 5th floor etc., and yet I wouldn’t dare presume to urge a change, because Theo has a certain need for movement, business and friends in Paris itself. His wife should see to it that he returns to his old Dutch diet as far as possible, since he’s been deprived of it for 10 years 
   or so at a stretch, and fed on restaurant food without any family life. I have every hope she’ll understand this, and perhaps already has understood. The main thing is possibly this: do you remember a story in that book ‘De pruuvers’, where there’s an account of a sick person who watched the maid sweep the floor every morning and thought that she — had ‘something reassuring’? That’s the main thing to which recovery can be attributed to a quite significant degree in the most dissimilar and utterly divergent illnesses. So, cruel as this may be, I should simply leave the disquiet about whether or not Theo’s constitution is strong to her, and let her worry and work at it for a year or so before we concern ourselves about it, and it occurs to me that our appearing not in the least anxious about it could turn out to be a sign of our own confidence in ‘something reassuring’ in nature in general. It occurs to me that in the summer here it’s not much hotter than at home as regards being bothered by it, since the air here is clearer and purer. What’s more, we very often have a strong wind, the mistral. I’ve painted in the wheatfields during the hottest part of the day without it bothering me much. But one can sometimes see that the sun can be quite strong from the way the wheat turns yellow quickly. But the fields at home are infinitely better farmed, more regularly than here, where the rockiness of the soil in many places means it’s not suitable for everything. 
   There are very beautiful fields of olive trees here, which are grey and silvery in leaf like pollard willows. Then I never tire of the blue sky. One never sees buckwheat or rape here, and generally speaking there’s rather less variety than at home. And I’d so much like to paint a field of buckwheat in flower or rape in flower, or flax. But I’ll probably find the opportunity to do it later in Normandy or Brittany. Then here one also never sees the mossy peasant roofs on the barns or cottages like at home, and no oak coppices and no spurry and no beech hedges with their red-brown leaves and whitish tangled old stems. Also no proper heathland and no birches, which were so beautiful in Nuenen. But what are beautiful in the south are the vineyards, where they’re on the flat land or the hillsides. I’ve seen it, and come to that sent Theo a painting of it, where a vineyard is all purple, crimson and yellow and green and violet like the Virginia creeper in Holland. I like to see a vineyard as much as a wheatfield. Then the hills here, full of thyme and other aromatic plants, are very beautiful, and because of the clarity of the air one can see from the heights so much further than at home. Well, I’ll end by telling you that I think you’re delighted that your son Theo has at last got round to marrying. If I were you, I wouldn’t worry about his health, but in your place I would see to it that I got his wife and him to come and visit you twice a year instead of once. This would be good for you and them, particularly now that Cor’s leaving. In his business it can’t do him any harm at all for his thoughts to have some distraction, and his wife, rest assured, won’t take it amiss of you if you awaken a desire in him to come to Holland with her now and then. Don’t forget that we have as many reasons for ingratitude as for gratitude to the Paris business, and in your capacity of Mother approaching 70 you may assert that sometimes. I kiss you in thought, and with a handshake for Cor I wish him the best of good luck in his enterprise. Believe me always Your loving Vincent Dear Mother, First of all, even though it’s late, I want to wish you a happy birthday. Twice I started a letter that I abandoned again because my mind wasn’t on writing. How very right of you and Wil simply both to have looked for other surroundings for a while after Cor’s departure. There was a lot of news in your last letters, first of all the particulars about Cor’s departure, and then that you’re going to move in November; I can well understand that you’d really like to be closer to your grandchildren. But all the same it will be a strange feeling to think that none of us is left in Brabant. I’m planning to send you a painting before long, and Wil too, I’m working on them, and certainly finished by the end of the month. Although it may take another fortnight before they’re dry enough to send. These last few weeks I’ve been perfectly well as far as my health goes, and I work almost without stopping from morning till night, day after day, and I lock myself up in the studio to have no distractions. So it continues to be a great comfort to me that the work is progressing rather than going backwards, and I do it with perfect calm, and my thoughts in this respect are entirely clear and self-assured. And so compared with others here, who can’t do anything, I certainly have no reason to complain. 
   The other day I wrote to Theo that I’d like to be not so far from Paris for a while, and probably something will come of it. Not that I’m unwilling to sacrifice my freedom so as to be less of a burden to others if it gets too bad, but at the moment it comes down to much the same thing. And among artists there are so many who, despite nervous diseases — or seizures from time to time — nevertheless go their own way, and in the life of the painter it is, it seems, not enough to make paintings but one must also not let one’s relations with other painters be harmed. My health is so good between times and my stomach so much better than before that I believe it could still be years before I become completely unfit, which I initially feared would be the case immediately. I’m afraid that I’ll again notice in time that tomorrow always comes when one is dealing with illness. But there doesn’t appear to be any rule to it, and the doctor5 repeated to me many times that one can say nothing about it in advance. But when one knows that it’s a malady that persists you’ll be able to understand that although one is completely overcome at first, one starts to get used to the idea and then considers what one can still do anyway. And that could still turn out better than expected.
   At first I was so despondent that I even lost the desire to see friends again and to work — now at the moment the need for those two things is beginning to act and, added to that, appetite and health are perfectly good between times. And so I really hanker for Theo and his wife, whom I haven’t even seen yet, and am interested in everything. And when I think that now there’s no need to seek new friends, then I think all the more about present and former friends. All the same, I understand that I may not go into this too deeply, since it might have to be arranged so very differently from what I sometimes imagine, and besides I’m not disposed towards any particular desire. Only I’m anything but courageous in distress and anything but patient when I’m not well, although I do have a fairly solid measure of patience to keep at my work. But that’s literally all. As often as I get the opportunity, I work on portraits that I sometimes think myself are more serious and better than the rest of my work. And if it might be that my condition permits me to go back to Paris again, or in the vicinity, that will become the main thing for me. And now I bid you goodbye for today, I beg your pardon for not writing before, and I hope to send you the paintings I’m making for you before long. Embraced in thought. Your loving Vincent My dear sister, More than once already I’ve tried – in the interval since my last letter1 – to write to you and to Mother. So I thank you for having again written me such a kind letter. How right I think both of you were, Mother and you, to have left Breda for a while3 after Cor’s departure. Certainly grief mustn’t build up in our hearts like the water of a turbid pool. From time to time I feel like that inside, as if I have a very turbid soul, but that’s an illness, and for people who are well and active, certainly they must do as you have done. As I write to Mother4 I’ll send her a painting in let’s say around a month, and there’ll be one for you too. I’ve painted a few for myself, too, these past few weeks – I don’t much like seeing my own paintings in my bedroom, so I’ve copied one by Delacroix5 and a few by Millet. The Delacroix is a Pietà, i.e. a dead Christ with the Mater Dolorosa. The exhausted corpse lies bent forward on its left side at the entrance to a cave, its hands outstretched, and the woman stands behind. It’s an evening after the storm, and this desolate, blue-clad figure stands out – its flowing clothes blown about by the wind – against a sky in which violet clouds fringed with gold are floating. In a great gesture of despair she too is stretching out her empty arms, and one can see her hands, a working woman’s good, solid hands. With its flowing clothes this figure is almost as wide in extent as it’s tall. And as the dead man’s face is in shadow, the woman’s pale head stands out brightly against a cloud – an opposition which makes these two heads appear to be a dark flower with a pale flower, arranged expressly to bring them out better. I didn’t know what had become of this painting, but while I was in the very process of working on it I came across an article by Pierre Loti, the author of Mon frère Yves and Pêcheur d’Islande and Madame Chrysanthème. An article by him on Carmen Sylva.
   If I remember rightly, you’ve read her poems. She’s a queen – she’s queen of Hungary or another country (I don’t know which), and in describing her boudoir, or rather her studio where she writes and where she makes paintings, Loti says that he saw this Delacroix canvas there, which struck him greatly. He speaks of Carmen Sylva, making one feel that she’s personally even more interesting than her words, although she says things like this: A woman without a child is a bell without a clapper – the sound of the bronze would perhaps be very beautiful – but — ... However, it does one good to think that a canvas like that is in such hands, and it consoles painters a little to be able to imagine that really there are souls who have a feeling for paintings. But there are relatively few of them. I thought of sending you yourself a sketch of it to give you an idea of what Delacroix is. This little copy of course has no value from any point of view. However, you’ll be able to see in it that Delacroix doesn’t draw the features of a Mater Dolorosa in the manner of Roman statues – And that the pallid aspect, the lost, vague gaze of a person tired of being in anguish and in tears and keeping vigil is present in it rather in the manner of Germinie Lacerteux. I consider it very good and very fortunate that you’re not absolutely enthusiastic about De Goncourt’s masterly book. So much the better that you prefer Tolstoy, you who read books above all to derive energies from them in order to act. I think you’re right a thousand times over. But I, who read books to seek in them the artist who made them, could I be wrong to like French novelists so much? I’ve just finished the portrait of a woman of forty or more, insignificant. The face faded and tired, pockmarked, an olive-tinged, suntanned complexion, black hair. A faded black dress adorned with a soft pink geranium, and the background in a neutral tone between pink and green.
   Because I sometimes paint things like that – with as little and as much drama as a dusty blade of grass by the side of the road – it’s right, as it seems to me, that I should have an unbounded admiration for De Goncourt, Zola, Flaubert, Maupassant, Huysmans. But as regards yourself, don’t hurry, and continue boldly with the Russians. Have you read Ma religion by Tolstoy15 yet – it must be very practical and really useful. So go right to the very depths of that, since you like it. Lately I’ve done two portraits of myself, one of which is quite in character, I think, but in Holland they’d probably scoff at the ideas about portraits that are germinating here. Did you see at Theo’s the portrait of the painter Guillaumin and the portrait of a young woman by the same? That really gives an idea of what one is searching for. When Guillaumin exhibited his portrait, public and artists laughed at it a great deal, and yet it’s one of the rare things that would hold up alongside even the old Dutchmen Rembrandt and Hals. I myself still find photographs frightful and don’t like to have any, especially not of people whom I know and love. These portraits, first, are faded more quickly than we ourselves, while the painted portrait remains for many generations. Besides, a painted portrait is a thing of feeling made with love or respect for the being represented. What remains to us of the old Dutchmen? The portraits. Thus in Mauve’s family the children will always continue to see him in the portrait that Mesker did so very well of him. At this very moment I’ve just received a letter from Theo in which he answers me on the subject of what I’d said of my desire to return to the north for a while. It’s quite likely that this will happen, to say exactly when, that still depends 
   on the opportunities there may be to go and live with some artist or another. But as we know several of them and it’s often advantageous to live in pairs, it won’t take long. Finally, I say ‘à bientôt’ to you, thanking you again very much for your letters. I don’t know yet which canvases I’ll send to you and Mother, probably a wheatfield and an olive grove with that copy after Delacroix. The weather outside has been splendid for a very long time, but I haven’t left my room for two months, I don’t know why. I would need courage, and I often lack it. And it’s also that since my illness the feeling of loneliness takes hold of me in the fields in such a fearsome way that I hesitate to go out. With time, though, that will change again. It’s only in front of the easel while painting that I feel a little of life. Anyway, that will change again, for my health is so good that the physique will win the day again. I kiss you affectionately in thought, and more soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friend Bernard, The other day my brother wrote to me that you1 were going to come to see my canvases; so I know that you’re back, and I’m very pleased that you thought of going to see what I’ve done. For my part, I’m extremely curious to know what you’ve brought back from Pont-Aven. I hardly have a head for writing, but I feel a great emptiness in no longer being at all up to date with what Gauguin, you and others are doing. But I really must have patience. I have another dozen studies here, which will probably be more to your taste than the ones from this summer that my brother will have shown you. Among these studies there’s an entrance to a quarry, pale lilac rocks in reddish earth, as in certain Japanese drawings. In terms of design and the division of colour into large planes, it’s quite closely related to what you’re doing in Pont-Aven. I had more control over myself in these latest studies, because my state of health had firmed up. So there’s also a no. 30 canvas with broken lilac ploughed fields and a background of mountains that go all the way up the canvas; so nothing but rough ground and rocks, with a thistle and dry grass in a corner, and a little violet and yellow man. That will prove, I hope, that I haven’t yet gone soft. Dear God, this is a pretty awful little part of the world, everything’s hard to do here, to disentangle its intimate character, and so that it’s not something vaguely true, but the true soil of Provence. So to achieve that, you have to toil hard. And so it naturally becomes a little abstract. Because it will be a question of giving strength and brilliance to the sun and the blue sky, and to the scorched and often so melancholy fields their delicate scent of thyme. The olive trees down here, my good fellow, they’d suit your book; I haven’t been fortunate this year in making a success of them, but I’ll go back to it, that’s my intention. It’s silver against orangeish or purplish earth, under the great blue sky. Well now, I’ve seen some by certain painters, and by myself, which didn’t render the thing at all. Those silver greys are like Corot first of all, and that, above all, hasn’t been done yet — while several artists have been successful with apple trees, for example, and willows. 
   So there are relatively few paintings of vineyards, which are nevertheless of such changing beauty. So there’s still plenty for me to fiddle around with here. Look here, what I very much regret not having seen at the Exhibition is a series of houses of all the nations; I think it was Garnier or Viollet-le-Duc who organized it. Well, could you, who will have seen it, give me an idea, and especially a croquis with the colour of the primitive Egyptian house? It must be very simple, a square block, I believe, on a terrace — but I’d like to know the colouring too. I was reading in an article that it was blue, red and yellow. Did you pay attention to it? Please inform me without fail! And it mustn’t be confused with the Persian or the Moroccan; there must be some that are more or less it, but not it. Anyway, for me the most wonderful thing that I know in terms of architecture is the cottage with a mossy thatched roof, with its blackened hearth. So I’m very fussy. I saw a croquis of ancient Mexican houses in an illustrated magazine; that, too, seemed primitive and really beautiful. Ah, if only one knew the things of those days, and if one could paint the people of those days who lived in them — it would be as beautiful as Millet. Anyway, what we do know that’s solid these days, then, is Millet; I’m not talking about colour — but as character, as something significant, as something in which one has solid faith. Now, about your service; will you go? I hope you’ll go to see my canvases again when I send the studies of autumn, in November. And if possible let me know what you’ve brought back from Brittany, because I’d really like to know what you yourself believe to be your best things. So I’ll write again soon. I’m working on a large canvas of a ravine; it’s a subject just like the study with a yellow tree that I still have from you, two bases of extremely solid rocks, between which a trickle of water flows, a third mountain that closes off the ravine. These motifs certainly have a beautiful melancholy, and it’s enjoyable to work in really wild sites where you have to bury your easel in the stones so that the wind doesn’t send everything flying to the ground.  Handshake. Yours truly, Vincent  Dear Mother, I wanted to write to you one more time while you’re still in the old house, to thank you for your last letter and the news of Cor’s safe passage. I believe that he’ll work there with enthusiasm and have some enjoyment in his life now and then. What he writes to you reminds me of what my friend Gauguin told me about Panama and Brazil. I didn’t know that Isaäcson is also going to the Transvaal. You know that I never met him personally — but I did write to him recently3 because he more or less intended to write about my work in a Dutch newspaper, which I asked him not to do, but at the same time to thank him for his loyal sympathy, because from the beginning we often thought about each other’s work and have the same ideas about our old Dutch and the present-day French painters. And I also like De Haan’s work a lot. Now I can inform you that what I promised you is entirely ready — that’s to say five of my landscape studies5 and a small portrait of myself6 and a study of an interior. I’m afraid it will disappoint you, though, and a few things seem unimportant and ugly to you. Wil and you can do with them as you wish, and give the other sisters a couple of them if you like, that’s why I’m sending a couple more. 
   But this is something that doesn’t concern me, only I wanted to make sure that there were things of mine in the family, and am only trying to form a few things into a sort of ensemble that I would prefer to see stay together so that in time it becomes rather more important. Only, I can understand in advance that you won’t have room for all 6, and so do with them as you wish. But I advise you to keep them together, at least for a while, since then you’ll be better able to judge which you like best in the long run. I’m sorry that Aunt Mina is suffering so, as you write;8 it’s a good many years since I saw her. I certainly agree with you that it’s a good deal better for Theo like this than before, and just hope everything goes well with Jo’s confinement, then they’ll be set up for quite a while. It’s always good to experience how a human being comes into the world, and that leads many characters to more peace and truth. The countryside here is very beautiful in the autumn, and the yellow leaves. I’m just sorry there aren’t more vineyards here, though I did go and paint one a few hours away. What happens is a large field turns entirely purple and red, like the Virginia creeper at home, and next to it a square of yellow and a little further on a patch that’s still green.
   All that beneath a sky of magnificent blue, and lilac rocks in the distance. Last year I had a better opportunity to paint that than now. I would have liked to include something like that with what I’m sending you, but I’ll have to owe it to you till another year. You’ll see from the little portrait of myself that I include that although I saw Paris, London and so many other large cities, and that for years at a time, I still look more or less like a peasant from Zundert, Toon or Piet Prins, say, and I sometimes imagine that I feel and think like that too, only the peasants are of more use in the world. It’s only when they have all the rest that people get a feeling for, need for paintings, books etc. So in my own estimation I definitely reckon myself below the peasants. Anyway, I plough on my canvases as they do in their fields. Otherwise things are wretched enough in our profession — that’s always been so, in fact — but it’s really very bad at present. And yet there have never been such prices paid for paintings as nowadays. What keeps us working is friendship for one another and love of nature, and anyway, when one’s taken the trouble to become master of the brush, one can’t stop painting.
   Compared with others I’m still among the fortunate ones, but just imagine what it must be like when someone starts in the profession and has to give it up before he’s done anything, and there are many like that. Reckon on 10 years needed to learn the profession, anyone who gets through 6, say, and pays for them and then has to give up, if you knew how miserable that is and how many there are like that. And the high prices one hears about, paid for work by painters who are dead and weren’t paid like that in life, it’s a sort of tulip mania12 from which the living painters get more disadvantage than advantage. And it will also pass like tulip mania. One can reason, however, that although tulip mania is long gone and forgotten, the flower growers have remained and will remain. And so I regard painting in the same way, that what remains is a sort of flower growing. And as to that I reckon myself fortunate to be in it. But the rest! These things to prove to you than one mustn’t be under any illusions. My letter must go off — at the moment I’m working on a portrait of one of the patients here. It’s strange that when one is with them for some time and is used to them, one no longer thinks about their being mad. Embraced in thought by Your loving Vincent My dear sister, Thank you very much for your last letter and the news of Cor. Soon you’ll move house, and this will be the last time I write to you at Breda. Very soon I’ll send Theo the painted studies I had promised, and he’ll get them to you in Leiden. This is what I have: An olive grove1 – Wheatfield with reaper2 – Wheatfields and cypresses3 – Interior4 – Ploughed fields, morning effect5 – Orchard in blossom6 – and a portrait of me. Let’s say that during the course of the next year I send you as many, that would make a little collection with the two that you have, and if you had enough room I would urge you to keep them together, since you’ll probably see artists from time to time in Leiden, and other studies would, I dare believe, soon join mine. Don’t feel uncomfortable about hanging them in a corridor, in the kitchen, on the stairs. My painting is made to be seen above all against a simple background. I try to paint in such a way that it looks good in a kitchen, then sometimes I notice that it looks well in a drawing room too, but I never bother myself about that. Here in the south we have bare walls, white or yellow, or decorated with wallpaper with big coloured flowers. So it seems to me that it’s a matter of proceeding by means of oppositions of bright colours. 
   It’s the same with the frames – the frames I use cost me 5 francs at the most, while the less solid gilded frames would cost 30 or more. And if the painting looks good in a simple frame, why put gilding around it? Listen now – if I willingly commit myself to continuing to send studies to you and Mother, I’d also have a desire that’s almost a need to do a few more in addition for people I think about often. Thus our cousins, the ladies Mauve and Lecomte, if you see them while in Leiden, tell them that if they like my work I would gladly do some for them, very gladly, but above all, too, I would like Margot Begemann to have a painting of mine. But getting it to her by way of you is more discreet than sending it to her directly. So you would oblige me by taking steps to see that these three people I’ve just mentioned have something of mine. There’s no hurry, but from time to time I do have the right, yes the right to work for friends who are so far away that I’ll probably not see them again. The doctor from here has been to Paris and went to see Theo, he told him that he does not consider me a lunatic but that the crises I have are of an epileptic nature. So it isn’t alcohol either that was the cause, although of course it doesn’t do one any good. But how difficult it is, how difficult it is to resume one’s ordinary life without being absolutely too demoralized by the certainty of unhappiness. And one clings on to the affections of the past. 
   So as I tell you, for me it’s almost an absolute need to send something of my work to Holland, and if you succeed in getting some accepted it will be my task to be grateful. You’ll probably find the interior the ugliest, an empty bedroom with a wooden bed and two chairs – and yet I’ve painted it twice on a large scale. I wanted to arrive at an effect of simplicity as described in Felix Holt. In telling you this you’ll perhaps understand the painting quickly, but it’s likely that it will remain ridiculous for others, not forewarned. To make simplicity with bright colours isn’t easy though, and I find that it can be useful to show that one can be simple with something other than grey, white, black and brown. That is the raison d’être for that study. You’ll find my wheatfields too yellow, but with me one shouldn’t begin by saying, it’s too yellow, too blue or too green. You’ll receive these studies in Leiden, I don’t know when. Theo will probably have one framed in Paris, so you can put them in a frame if you wish and then, when the opportunity arises, put them in a crate of paintings for The Hague. But anyway, everything’s completed as regards my painting, and I assure you that it isn’t the worst I’ve done. I’d also like you to have the red vineyard that Theo has of mine, and if ever I come to Paris again I’ll copy it for you. Yes, I’m coming back one more time to that interior, I’d certainly like other artists to have, like me, the taste, the need for simplicity. In current society, though, an ideal of simplicity makes life more difficult, and he who has it, this ideal – he merely ends up, as in my case, unable to do what he wants.
   But anyway, that however is what society should give an artist, it seems to me, whereas nowadays one is obliged to live in the cafés or low inns. The Japanese have lived in very simple interiors, and what great artists have lived in that country! If a painter is rich in our society, then he lives in a house that resembles a curiosity shop, and that isn’t very artistic either, to my taste. And I myself have suffered greatly from living so much in conditions where order was impossible, that I lost the notion of order and simplicity. That good fellow Isaäcson wanted to write an article on me in a Dutch newspaper on paintings absolutely like those I’m sending you, but I’d be very sad to read such an article, and I wrote to tell him so. Now I’m working on a hospital ward. In the foreground a big black stove around which a few grey or black shapes of patients, then behind the very long ward, tiled with red with the two rows of white beds, the walls white, but a lilac or green white, and the windows with pink curtains, with green curtains, and in the background two figures of nuns in black and white. The ceiling is violet with large beams. I had read an article on Dostoevsky, who had written a book, Souvenirs de la maison des morts, and that spurred me on to begin work again on a large study that I’d begun in the fever ward in Arles. But it’s annoying to paint figures without models. I’ve read another of Carmen Sylva’s ideas, which is very true: when you suffer a lot – you see everybody at a great distance, and as if at the far end of an immense arena – the very voices seem to come from a long way off. I’ve experienced this in these crises to such a point that all the people I see then seem to me, even if I recognize them – which isn’t always the case – to come from very far away and to be entirely different from what they are in reality, so much do I then seem to see in them pleasant or unpleasant resemblances to people I’ve known in other times and places. Au revoir, I wish you every success with your work of moving house, and kiss you in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 20 November 1889 St-Rémy in Provence  Sir, I accept with pleasure your invitation to exhibit with the Vingtistes. Here is the list of canvases I intend for you 

No 
1 
Sunflowers2


 
2
Sunflowers3


 
3
 The ivy4


 
4
Orchard in blossom (Arles)5


 
5
Wheatfield. Rising sun (St-Rémy)6


 
6
The red vineyard (Montmajour)7


  (All these canvases are no. 30 canvases.) I am perhaps exceeding the 4 metres of room but as I believe that the 6 together, thus chosen, will make a rather varied colour effect, perhaps you will find a way of placing them. Please accept the expression of my entire fellow-feeling for the Vingtistes. Vincent van Gogh My dear friend Bernard, Thank you for your letter, and thank you especially for your photos, which give me an idea of your work. Incidentally, my brother wrote to me about it the other day, saying that he very much liked the harmoniousness of the colour, a certain nobility in several figures. Look, in the adoration of the shepherds, the landscape charms me too much for me to dare to criticize, and nevertheless, it’s too great an impossibility to imagine a birth like that, on the very road, the mother who starts praying instead of giving suck, the fat ecclesiastical bigwigs, kneeling as if in an epileptic fit, God knows how or why they’re there, but I myself don’t find it healthy. Because I adore the true, the possible, were I ever capable of spiritual fervour; so I bow before that study, so powerful that it makes you tremble, by père Millet — peasants carrying to the farmhouse a calf born in the fields. Now, my friend — people have felt that from France to America. After that, would you go back to renewing medieval tapestries for us? Truly, is this a sincere conviction? no, you can do better than that, and you know that one has to look for the possible, the logical, the true, even if to some extent you had to forget Parisian things à la Baudelaire. How I prefer Daumier to that gentleman! An annunciation of what — — — I see figures of angels, elegant, my word, a terrace with two cypresses, which I like very much; there’s an enormous amount of air, of clarity in it but in the end, once this first impression is past, I wonder if it’s a mystification, and these secondary characters no longer tell me anything. But this is enough for you to understand that I would long to see things of yours again, like the painting of yours that Gauguin has, those Breton women walking in a meadow, the arrangement of which is so beautiful, the colour so naively distinguished. Ah, you’re exchanging that for something — must one say the word — something artificial — something affected. 
   Last year, from what Gauguin was telling me, you were doing a painting more or less like this, I imagine.  And when I compare that with that nightmare of a Christ in the Garden of Olives, well, it makes me feel sad, and I herewith ask you again, crying out loud and giving you a piece of my mind with all the power of my lungs, to please become a little more yourself again. The Christ carrying his Cross is atrocious. Are the splashes of colour in it harmonious? But I won’t let you off the hook for a commonplace — commonplace, you hear — in the composition. When Gauguin was in Arles, I once or twice allowed myself to be led into abstraction, as you know, in a woman rocking a cradle, a dark woman reading novels in a yellow library, and at that time abstraction seemed an attractive route to me. But that’s enchanted ground, — my good fellow — and one soon finds oneself up against a wall. I’m not saying that one may not take the risk after a whole manly life of searching, of fighting hand-to-hand with reality, but as far as I’m concerned I don’t want to rack my brains over that sort of thing. And the whole year, have fiddled around from life, hardly thinking of Impressionism or of this or that. However, once again I’m allowing myself to do stars too big, &c., new setback, and I’ve enough of that. So at present am working in the olive trees, seeking the different effects of a grey sky against yellow earth, with dark green note of the foliage; another time the earth and foliage all purplish against yellow sky, then red ochre earth and pink and green sky. See, that interests me more than the so-called abstractions. 
   And if I haven’t written for a long time, it’s because, having to struggle against my illness and to calm my head, I hardly felt like having discussions, and found danger in these abstractions. And by working very calmly, beautiful subjects will come of their own accord; it’s truly first and foremost a question of immersing oneself in reality again, with no plan made in advance, with no Parisian bias. Besides, am very dissatisfied with this year, but perhaps it will prove a solid foundation for the coming one. I’ve let myself become thoroughly imbued with the air of the small mountains and the orchards. With that, I’ll see. My ambition is truly limited to a few clods of earth, some sprouting wheat. An olive grove. A cypress; the latter not easy to do, for example. You who love the primitives, who study them, I ask you why you appear not to know Giotto. Gauguin and I saw a tiny panel of his in Montpellier, the death of some sainted woman or other. The expressions in it of pain and ecstasy are human to the point that, 19th century though it may be, you feel you’re in it — and believe you were there, present, so much do you share the emotion. If I saw your actual canvases, I believe the colour could nevertheless excite me. But then you speak of portraits that you’ve done, and have captured precisely; that’s something that will be good, and where you will have been yourself. Here’s description of a canvas that I have in front of me at the moment. A view of the garden of the asylum where I am, on the right a grey terrace, a section of house, some rosebushes that have lost their flowers; on the left, the earth of the garden — red ochre — earth burnt by the sun, covered in fallen pine twigs. This edge of the garden is planted with large pines with red ochre trunks and branches, with green foliage saddened by a mixture of black. These tall trees stand out against an evening sky streaked with violet against a yellow background. High up, the yellow turns to pink, turns to green. A wall — red ochre again — blocks the view, and there’s nothing above it but a violet and yellow ochre hill. Now, the first tree is an enormous trunk, but struck by lightning and sawn off. A side branch thrusts up very high, however, and falls down again in an avalanche of dark green twigs. This dark giant — like a proud man brought low — contrasts, when seen as the character of a living being, with the pale smile of the last rose on the bush, which is fading in front of him. Under the trees, empty stone benches, dark box. The sky is reflected yellow in a puddle after the rain. A ray of sun — the last glimmer — exalts the dark ochre to orange — small dark figures prowl here and there between the trunks. You’ll understand that this combination of red ochre, of green saddened with grey, of black lines that define the outlines, this gives rise a little to the feeling of anxiety from which some of my companions in misfortune often suffer, and which is called ‘seeing red’. And what’s more, the motif of the great tree struck by lightning, the sickly green and pink smile of the last flower of autumn, confirms this idea. Another canvas depicts a sun rising over a field of new wheat. Receding lines of the furrows run high up on the canvas, towards a wall and a range of lilac hills. The field is violet and green-yellow. The white sun is surrounded by a large yellow aureole. In it, in contrast to the other canvas, I have tried to express calm, a great peace. 
   I’m speaking to you of these two canvases, and especially the first, to remind you that in order to give an impression of anxiety, you can try to do it without heading straight for the historical garden of Gethsemane; in order to offer a consoling and gentle subject it isn’t necessary to depict the figures from the Sermon on the Mount21 — ah — it is — no doubt — wise, right, to be moved by the Bible, but modern reality has such a hold over us that even when trying abstractly to reconstruct ancient times in our thoughts — just at that very moment the petty events of our lives tear us away from these meditations and our own adventures throw us forcibly into personal sensations: joy, boredom, suffering, anger or smiling. The Bible — the Bible — Millet was brought up on it from his childhood, used to read only that book and yet never, or almost never, did biblical paintings. Corot did a Garden of Olives with Christ and the star of Bethlehem: sublime. In his work you feel Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles too, sometimes, as well as the Gospels, but how sober and always giving due weight to modern, possible sensations common to us all. But, you’ll say, Delacroix — yes, Delacroix — but then you’d have to study in a very different way, yes, study history before putting things in their place like that. So, they’re a setback, my dear fellow, your biblical paintings, but... there are few who make mistakes like that, and it’s an error, but your return from it will be, I dare to say, astonishing, and it’s by making mistakes that one sometimes finds the way. Look, avenge yourself by painting your garden as it is, or anything you like. In any case, it’s good to look for what’s distinguished, what’s noble in figures, and your studies represent an effort that’s been made, and so something other than wasted time. To know how to divide a canvas into large, tangled planes like that, to find contrasting lines and forms — that’s technique — trickery, if you like, but anyway, it means you’re learning your craft more thoroughly, and that’s good. No matter how hateful and cumbersome painting may be in the times in which we live, the person who has chosen this craft, if he nevertheless practises it with zeal, is a man of duty, both sound and loyal. Society sometimes makes existence very hard for us, and from that too comes our impotence and the imperfection of our works. I believe that Gauguin himself suffers greatly from it, too, and cannot develop as he yet has it in him to do. I myself suffer in that I’m utterly without models. On the other hand, there are beautiful sites here. Have just done 5 no. 30 canvases of the olive trees. And if I still stay here it’s because my health is recovering greatly. What I’m making is harsh, dry, but it’s because I’m trying to reinvigorate myself by means of rather arduous work, and would fear that abstractions would make me soft. Have you seen a study of mine with a little reaper? A field of yellow wheat and a yellow sun. It isn’t there yet — but in it I’ve again attacked this devil of a question of yellow. I’m talking about the one that’s impastoed and done on the spot, not about the repetition with hatching, in which the effect is weaker. I wanted to do it in pure sulphur. I’d have plenty more things to tell you — but although I write today that my mind is somewhat stronger, previously I was afraid of overheating it before I was cured. In thought a very warm handshake, to Anquetin too, to other friends if you see them, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent No need to tell you that I regret, for you as well as for your father, that he didn’t approve of your spending the season with Gauguin. The latter wrote to me that for reasons of health your service has been postponed for a year. Thank you anyway for the description of the Egyptian house. I would still have liked to know if it was larger or smaller than a cottage back home — the size relative to the human figure, in short. I was looking for information about the colouring in particular. Dear Mother, I can very well understand that you say in your letter that it did you good ‘to have lots of people around again’ when Anna’s children and Lies were with you. Wil described the house to me in detail, and I’m very glad that your experience proves that the reasons for the change were justified. And so I hope that you’ll have many more very good days in Leiden — and rest assured I think of you very often here, where I spend my days more turned in on myself than sometimes seems to me desirable. All the same, I certainly have no reason whatsoever to complain, feeling stronger and healthier and calmer than before and compared with this time last year; then I certainly thought I wouldn’t recover again. I’ll always go on feeling the shock of that time, though, and if I just stick to my work it will be all right, wholly giving up the rest as difficult to reconcile, and as worrying about things can do little either way.
   As regards the exhibition in Brussels, why it doesn’t leave me indifferent is because I’ll have a few paintings3 from here which, notwithstanding that they were made in a very different region, have remained completely and utterly as if they were painted in Zundert, say, or Kalmthout, and I believe could also be understood by people who don’t, as they say, know anything about paintings. And so people could say that it would perhaps have been simpler had I just stayed quietly in North Brabant — but that’s as it is, and what is a body to do about it? Your thoughts will be much with Theo and Jo; I think it’s a very good plan for Wil to go and lend a hand in January and hope that that will work out, and if you go to stay with Aunt Mina in the meantime will also be doing a favour there, now Aunt is ill. Please don’t forget to remember me to her when you see her. It’s brave of her that, as you write, she suffers without complaining. 
   I imagine I’ll spend a large part of next year here, too, since even if this were no longer absolutely necessary for my health, it would turn out best for my work — since I’m now fairly oriented here. It’s certainly not cheap for what one gets for it — but change is always damaging to the painting, and so I’m seriously thinking about staying, seeing as I can be very regular in my work here. And apart from that the region has hardly been painted, if at all, by anyone else yet. Because this is a region of the south here that’s no warmer than at home, and the other painters usually go a little further, to Nice, for instance. It’s great news that Aunt is no longer in Princenhage, but in any case she was very right to have dispensed with Jacob and Co., since they indeed seemed to have always been the actual owners of the whole show — and that was really too much to bear.
   It’s one of those strange things in life that one finds hard to make head or tail of  in order to understand the reason for them. Anyway, I think she’s absolutely right — and yet she must have been or still is attached to Princenhage. And attachment to things is a part of us and it’s hard for others to take away from us. And now I say goodbye to you and Wil for today. Thanks again for the messages about Cor — and embraced in thought by Your loving Vincent My dear sister, Thanks very much for writing to me. Myself, I’d be very pleased if you went to Theo’s in January – as it isn’t impossible that I too may go to Paris, we may meet. The description of your and Mother’s new dwelling interests me a great deal, and this move is indeed a wise and well-considered arrangement. It would certainly charm me if I saw it, this quay where people come to wash green and red wool with the small barges and vessels moored, and the factory with its windows lit up in the evening. Those are effects that I would paint. And the garden too, with its espalier mulberry tree. As regards mulberry trees, there are a lot here. I painted one not long ago when its bushy foliage was a magnificent yellow against a very blue sky and a white, stony, sunlit field behind. I’m planning to send to Brussels4 sunflowers, a completely red vineyard in the autumn, an orchard in blossom, tree-trunks covered with ivy, and finally a field of young wheat in the rising sun. I’m working on this last canvas at the moment, it is (with the orchard in blossom, which Theo liked, from what he was saying)10 the gentlest thing I’ve painted. The fleeing lines of the furrows rise high into the canvas towards a background of purplish hills. The earth is pink and violet marbled with the yellow-green of the wheat. The sky in the background with a sun is pale lemon yellow and pink. Above all, don’t imagine that it’s less cold here than in Holland, the winter has only just begun and we’ll have it until the end of March. Only less rain than in Holland, very cold, unbearably irritating wind, and cold spells that are dry and bright but severe all the same, although the sun has more strength and the sky is very blue. 
   You will receive soon, I think, the canvases I promised you. What I find very unfortunate is that you write that Jo says that Theo’s still coughing the whole time – blast – that doesn’t please me – however, I still hope that when he’s a father it’ll get better. I’d like him to have my health, in this sense that I myself always have lots of life in the fresh air, and he’s always always at his desk with so many troubles on his mind. And they’re wicked at Boussods’, too full of pride and tyrannical. I have 12 large canvases on the go, above all olive groves, one with an entirely pink sky, another with a green and orange sky, a third with a big yellow sun. Then tall, ravaged pines against a red sunset sky. I’ve just received a very kind letter from Theo, he says that Jo and he are well, and he also says that you’ll perhaps come to them. Let’s keep hoping that in a while his health will completely recover – with him, the state of his mind greatly influences the rest. At the moment many painters who spent the winter in the countryside are returning to Paris. You ask who Bernard is – he’s a young painter – he’s twenty at most. Very original. He seeks to do modern figures as elegant as ancient Greeks or Egyptians. A grace in the expressive movements, a charm through daring colours. I saw a Sunday afternoon in Brittany by him 
  , Breton peasant women, peasants, dogs strolling in a very green meadow, the costumes are black and red, and big white caps. But in this crowd there are also two ladies, one in red, the other in bottle green, who make it into a really modern thing. Ask Theo to show you the watercolour I did after the painting, it was so original that I wanted to have a copy of it. Now you think you remember having seen some rocks by him, he’s done a lot of them, and cliffs and beaches in Brittany. He’s also done landscapes and figures of the Paris suburbs. Theo has an excellent thing of his which I exchanged with Bernard for a canvas of mine. It’s the portrait of his very old grandmother, one-eyed, the background is a bedroom wall covered with chocolate-coloured wallpaper, and a completely white bed. He’s just sent me 6 photographs of paintings he’s done this year, and by contrast they are bizarre biblical subjects and very open to criticism. But you can see from this that he’s a curious fellow, a seeker who tries everything. It’s like tapestries from the Middle Ages: stiff, brightly coloured figures. But I have only a mediocre admiration for this, because the English Pre-Raphaelites23 did those things with more seriousness and conscientiousness and knowledge and logic. Thus you may know Millais who did The Huguenot24 and an engraving, The light of the world. If you wanted I could tell Bernard to do your portrait when you’re in Paris, he’d certainly do it, and very well I can assure you, I wouldn’t speak to him about it if it would displease you, but I myself would very much like him to do it. And I would exchange it for a painting of mine he wants me to exchange.
   While writing this letter I got to my feet to go and give a few brushstrokes to a canvas in progress – specifically, it’s the one with the ravaged pines against a red, orange, yellow sky – yesterday it was very fresh – pure, dazzling tones – well while writing to you I don’t know what thoughts came to me, and upon looking at my canvas I told myself, that’s not it. So I took a colour that appears as matt, dirty white on the palette, which one obtains by mixing white, green and a little carmine, I slashed this green tone all over the sky, and there you are, from a distance it softens the tones by breaking them up. And yet it would seem that one spoils and dirties the canvas. Do misfortune and sickness not do this with us and our health, and are we not worth more just as we are, in fate, the great destiny that carries us away, than serene and well according to our own vague ideas and desires of possible happiness? I don’t know. Some of my paintings, when I compare them to others, certainly do bear the trace that it’s a sick man who paints them, and I can assure you that I don’t do it deliberately. But despite myself, my calculations end up at broken tones. Bernard has parents who grudgingly house and feed him, often reproaching him for still not earning money. So the house there is sometimes a hell, but no one works so much with so few expenses to my knowledge. Anyway he’s a fine, really Parisian boy, very elegant. He was to go off to be a soldier this year, but for health reasons it has been postponed to next year. I must go and work some more, more soon, I kiss you affectionately in thought. Ever yours, Vincent Dear Mother, Towards the end of the year I come to bid you good-day once more. You’ll say that I’ve forgotten it many times. It’s a year since I became ill, and it’s difficult for me to express the extent to which I have or haven’t recovered. I often have terrible self-reproach about things in the past, my illness being pretty much my own fault, and in any event it’s doubtful whether I can make amends for faults in any way. But reasoning or thinking about this is sometimes so difficult, and sometimes my feelings overwhelm me more than in the past. And then I can think so much of you and of the past. You and Pa have been so much, so very much to me, possibly more even than to the others, and I don’t seem to have had a happy nature. I started to realize that in Paris, how much more than I Theo did his best to help Pa practically, so much so that his own interests often went by the board because of it. That’s why I’m so thankful now at present that Theo finally found a wife and is waiting for his baby. Anyway, Theo had more self-denial than I, and that’s deep in his character. And when Pa was no longer with us and I went to him in Paris, then the poor chap attached himself so much to me that I came to understand how much he had loved Pa. And now, I say this to you and to Wil and not to him, it’s a good thing I didn’t stay in Paris because we should, he and I, have become all too much bound up in each other. 
   And that’s not what life’s for. I can’t tell you how much better I think it is for him as it is now than before; he had too many tiring things on his mind, and his health suffered for it. When I was first ill I couldn’t accept the idea that I had to go into an asylum. And now at present I admit that I should have been treated earlier, but it’s human to err in that. A French writer says that all painters are mad to some degree, and although there’s a great deal to be said against that, it’s certain that one is too easily alienated by it. Be this as it may, here, where I don’t have to concern myself with anything etc. — I imagine that the standard of my work is getting better. And so I go on with relative calm and do my best at my work and don’t count myself among the unfortunates. At the moment I’m working on a painting of a path between the mountains and a small stream that works its way between the stones. The rocks are solid lilac grey or pink, with bushes here and there: box and a sort of broom, that have all sorts of colours, green, yellow, red, brown, because of the autumn. And the stream in the foreground white and foaming like soapsuds, and further up reflecting the blue of the sky. And now it’s certain that the work they’re making here at present is very different — more colourful and more forthrightly drawn than what people used to do in Holland in the time of Schelfhout, say. 
         And yet the one is so much a consequence of the other. For example, you knew the old Van de Sande Bakhuyzen and Jules Bakhuyzen. I thought of their work only recently, that with all the apparent difference there’s still so little change in people’s ideas. Anyway I believe that Jules Bakhuyzen, say, would understand perfectly what I paint these days, that ravine with the stream, and another painting — of the park at the asylum — large pine trees against an evening sky. I hope Theo sent you my studies, but I’m already working on another rather large painting for you of women harvesting olives. The trees grey-green with a pink sky and purplish soil. All the colours more subdued than usual. I had hoped to send it before long, but it’s drying slowly. As I told you, I often regret that I’m sometimes so alienated; I resist it, but it makes me so unfit to do many things that were actually my duty. There’s literally nothing wrong with my health, but last year’s shock means I would still dread going outside an asylum. I’ve sometimes imagined that if I abandoned painting and had some hard life or other, as a soldier going to the east, say, that would make me better. But it’s already rather too late for that, and I’m afraid they’d turn me down. I think this half in jest, half in earnest. For the moment the work’s going well, but of course my thoughts, always fixed on colours and drawing, continue to go round in a rather small circle. 
   So I want to live by the day — trying to get from one to the next. And for that matter my fellow painters also often complain that the profession makes one so powerless. Or that it’s the powerless who practise it. How much you must be thinking about Theo and Jo and the forthcoming event; I hope with all my heart that it goes well. I’m glad to be able to imagine what your house is like after Wil’s description. Is there any more news from Cor? It’s very good that you’re close to Anna and will see your grandchildren around you. Give everyone at Anna’s my very best wishes at the ending of the year. The weather here has been quite mild the last few days. Although many days of frost and wind, too, but then the sun shines more strongly than in Holland. Do you remember that Rappard once said ‘it’s sometimes refreshing’ when he’d had typhoid fever and later stayed with us. I sometimes think about that when I feel much stronger and at times more clear-headed than last year. Now I wish you a happy Christmas and a good New Year. Embraced in thought by Your loving Vincent I’ll write to Wil next time, because it’s time for the post.  My dear sister, In haste I’m adding a line for you, it’s exactly a year since I had that attack, I certainly have no reason to complain about it too much, as things are going better at present. But from time to time, though, it’s to be feared that it may return. And this leaves the mind in a latent state of sensitivity. I hope that you’ll quite like the canvas I’m doing for Mother and you at the moment. It’s a repetition of a painting for Theo, Women picking olives. For this past fortnight I’ve worked hard continuously. 
   Do you know the poetry I’ve written down for you opposite? There’s a painting that Whistler did of his mother3 which is like that. But above all in our old Dutch paintings we find it sometimes. When I think of Mother she too appears like that to me. Life isn’t always very jolly here, and my companions in misfortune quite often feel bored, but there’s a lot of resignation and patience here. But many of them do nothing, they remain self-absorbed all day, and I sometimes think that if they were in an asylum where manual work was compulsory they would feel better for it. More soon, I kiss you in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   Who is the maid my spirit seeks Through cold reproof and slanders blight Has she loves roses on her cheek Is hers an eye of calm delight? No, wan and sunk with midnight prayer Are the pale looks of her I love And if by times a light be there That light was kindled from above I choose not her mine hearts elect Amongst those that seek their makers shrine – In gems and garlands proudly decked As if themselves were things divine No heaven but faintly warms the breast That beats beneath a broidered veil And they who come in glittering dress To mourn their frailty – yet are frail Not so the form of her I love And love because her bloom is gone But ne’er was beauties bloom so bright So touching as that forms decay That like the altars wavering light In holy lustre fades away. My dear sister, A few lines to tell you that I’m very pleased that you’re in Paris with Theo and Jo. And no need to tell you that I think of all of you every day. Fortunately, a quite violent attack of exaltation or delirium is again behind me and I don’t feel any after-effects, so to speak, I am as I am every day. And I’m going to begin work again first thing tomorrow if the weather permits. Today we have a very mild day with a spring sun, one would say. And yesterday while out walking I saw dandelions already in flower in the meadows, which will be shortly followed by the daisies and violets. I find the winter very beautiful here and absolutely the same thing as in the north, only a bit brighter. 
   Yesterday I sent some paintings to Paris – and the one of the women picking olives I designated for you and Mother. You’ll see, I think, that in a white frame it takes on quite a soft colour effect, the opposition of the pink and the green. Soon I’ll send a few more that are drying at the moment, some more mountains, and a view of the garden here with tall pines3  I shan’t  write any more to you today because the letter must go off. I’m very glad that you’re there, and I hope that the great event will pass happily for Jo. More soon.  Ever yours, Vincent. My dear sister, The other day I saw some people sick with influenza and I’m so curious to know if you’ve had it too, as I’m inclined to believe. I saw a female patient who had a rather worrying nervous complication, and a distressing change of life. Are you enjoying yourself in Paris? I could very well imagine that it would strike you as being an over-large city, too muddled. That’s what always vexes us, we who are rather accustomed to simpler surroundings. Write to me one of these days if you’d like to, for I very much want to hear you say that you’re better. I fear a little the effect that Paris will have on me should I return there, as will probably be the case in the spring. For all through the year I’ve forced myself to forget Paris as much as I could from the point of view of the disturbance and excitement a prolonged stay causes. No matter what people say; we painters work better in the country, everything there speaks more clearly, everything holds firm, everything explains itself, now in a city when one is tired one no longer understands anything and feels as if one is lost. 
   I hope that the painting of the women in the olive trees2 will be a little to your taste – I sent the drawing of it to Gauguin just recently and he told me that he thought it good, and he knows my work well, and he isn’t embarrassed to say so when it isn’t right. You would naturally be quite free to take another of them in its place if you wished, but in the long run I almost dare believe that you’d return to this one. It hasn’t been at all cold here lately, and next month I’ll go and work outdoors with all my strength. Ah, speaking of the difference between the city and the fields, what a master Millet is. That fellow, so wise, so moved, does the countryside in such a way that even in town one continues to feel it. And then he has something unique and so good right down to his depths that it consoles one to look at his works, and one wonders if he did them this way expressly to console us. Now, better than in the beginning, I see the real countryside of Provence – and as regards people it’s so very 
   very much the same thing as in our native country, while it manifests itself quite differently, while the farming practices and labours of the fields aren’t the same as in our northern heaths and fields. I think a lot about Holland and about our youth back then – precisely because here I feel right in the middle of the countryside. However I’m getting old, you know, and it seems to me that life passes more quickly and the responsibilities are more serious, the question of working to make up for lost time more critical, the day more difficult to do and the future more mysterious, and my word a little more gloomy too. One of these days I also hope to write a line to Mother, we all owe a great deal to you, to you who care for her so faithfully and will keep her for us for as long as possible. I imagine that Theo is probably going to be very happy one of these days, only I do have something of an idea that the days of vigil before and during have their great anxieties. Which, moreover, I cannot completely refrain from sharing. And from what he writes to me, Jo is so brave and so lively. Anyway, that is moreover how one should always take things. I like friend Gauguin so much because he has found the means to make both children and paintings at the same time, at the moment he’s horribly in distress and has this worry that one of his children has had a misfortune6 and he not there and in no condition to come to its aid. 
   Have you met Emile Bernard now – I’d very much like him to come and see some of my canvases one of these days, I ought to write to him, but just now I’m expecting a letter from him at any moment. He must have a lot of difficulty getting by, he’s a complete Parisian by birth, that one, and he’s an example of vivacity for me, he looks as if he comes straight out of Daudet, but then much more immature, and naturally much more incomplete. However my dear sister, how much more practical and solid are the ideas of doctors, mechanics, in fact of heaps of people, than those of artists. I myself often sigh deeply that I should have been better than I am. I’ll shut up quickly so as not to discourage myself. Anyway, one can’t retrace one’s steps, and the steps one has taken have a lot of influence on the future. I hope that you’ll see lots of beautiful things, and above all that you’re well now. Have you read anything these last few days or lately: I haven’t at all. If you have a spare half hour I recommend myself heartily to have news from you. I kiss you affectionately in thought. Ever yours, Vincent Above all, tell me what you think of Isaäcson, myself I think very highly of him, and heartily recommend him to you. My dear friends Mr and Mrs Ginoux, I don’t know if you’ll remember, I find it quite strange, that about a year ago Mrs Ginoux was ill at the same time as I was;1 and now it has been so again since – just around Christmas – for a few days I was again taken quite badly this year, however it was over very quickly; I had it less than a week. Since, therefore, my dear friends, we sometimes suffer together, it makes me think of what Mrs Ginoux said – ‘when people are friends they’re that way for a long time’. I myself believe that the annoyances one experiences in the ordinary routine of life do us at least as much good as bad. The thing that makes one fall ill, overcome by discouragement, today, that same thing gives us the energy, once the illness is over, to get up and want to recover the next day.
   I can assure you that the other year it almost vexed me to recover my health – to be better for a longer or shorter time – continuing always to fear relapses – almost vexed – I tell you – so little desire did I have to begin again. I’ve very often told myself that I’d prefer that there be nothing more and that it was over. Well yes – we’re not the master of that – of our existence, and it’s a matter, seemingly, of learning to want to live on, even when suffering. Ah, I feel so cowardly in that respect, even as my health returns. I still fear. So who am I to encourage others, you’ll rightly say to me, it hardly suits me. Anyway, it’s only to say to you, my dear friends, that 
   I hope so ardently, and that moreover I dare hope, that Mrs Ginoux’s illness will be very fleeting and that she’ll recover from it entirely enlivened. But she isn’t unaware how fond we all are of her and wish to see her well. As for me, illness has done me good – it would be ungrateful not to acknowledge that; it has calmed me, and I’ve had more luck this year than I had dared hope for, quite unlike what I had imagined. But if I hadn’t been so well cared for, if people hadn’t been as kind to me as they have been, I think I would have pegged out or that I would have completely lost my reason. Business is business, then duty too is duty, so it’s only right that I soon return for a while to see my brother. But it will be hard for me to leave the south, 
   I can assure all of you who have become friends to me – friends for a long time. I’ve forgotten again to thank you for the olives you sent me the other time and which were excellent, I’ll bring you back the boxes soon. I’m therefore writing to you, dear friends, to try to distract for a moment our dear patient so that she can resume her habitual smile, to please all of us who know her. As I’ve told you, in a fortnight I hope to come and see you again, quite cured. Illnesses are there to make us remember again that we aren’t made of wood. That’s what seems the good side of all this to me. Then afterwards one goes back to one’s everyday work less fearful of the annoyances, with a new store of serenity. And even if we part, it will be while yet saying to oneself again: ‘and when people are friends they’re that way for a long time’ – for that is the means to be able to leave one another. Well, more soon, and my best wishes for Mrs Ginoux’s speedy recovery. Believe me Yours truly, Vincent. Dear Jo, It touches me so much that you write to me so calmly and so much master of yourself on one of your difficult nights. How I long to hear that you’ve come through safely and that your child lives. How happy Theo will be, and a new sun will rise in him when he sees you recovering. Forgive me if I tell you that to my mind recovery takes a long time and is no easier than being ill. Our parents knew that too, and following them in that is, I believe, what one calls duty. Well for my part, I’m thinking about all of you these days. I’m better, but have again had a few days like the other, that’s to say that I didn’t know exactly how I was, and was upset. But you see that calm is returning.
   I read Theo’s letter with 50 francs enclosed at the same time as your letter; he writes things to me that give me a great deal of pleasure. And I hope to send him a new batch of my work before long. But how I’m longing to hear of the good outcome to your struggle. Tell him that I’ve had a good letter from Gauguin. And if Wil’s still with you, which I suppose, tell her that I’ve received her letter and hope to answer it soon. She’ll be so happy, too, if it goes well with you and your baby, and it’s very good indeed to be present at such events.
   And Ma in Leiden will rejoice in it more than anyone else, because she’s longed for so long, I believe, that things were rather happier for him. Well, I’ll be glad when I can congratulate Theo and you, and will hope that it’s already the case. So much with you and them in thought Your brother Vincent I won’t write any more, because I’m still not entirely calm. More soon.  My dear friend Russell Today I’m sending you a little roll of photographs after Millet1 which perhaps you may not know. In any event, it’s to recall us, my brother and myself, to your good memory. Do you know that my brother has since married and that any day now he’s expecting his first-born? May it go well – he has a very nice Dutch wife. How it pleases me to write to you after a long silence.
   Do you remember the time when, almost simultaneously, you I think first and I afterwards, met our friend Gauguin? He’s still struggling on – and alone, or almost alone, like the good fellow he is. Am sure, though, that you don’t forget him. He and I are still friends, I can assure you, but perhaps you’re not unaware that I myself am ill, and have more than once had serious nervous crises and delirium. This was why, having had to go into an asylum for the insane, he and I separated. But prior to that, how many times we talked about you together! Gauguin is currently still with one of my fellow-countrymen 
   called De Haan, and De Haan praises him a great deal and doesn’t find it at all bad to be with him. You will find article on canvases of mine at the Vingtistes, I assure you that I myself owe a lot to things that Gauguin told me as regards drawing, and hold his way of loving nature in high, very high esteem. For in my opinion he’s worth even more as a man than as an artist. Are things going well with you? And are you still working a lot? Although being ill isn’t a cause for joy, I nevertheless have no right to complain about it, for it seems to me that nature sees to it that illness is a means of getting us back on our feet, of healing us, rather than an absolute evil. If you ever come to Paris, 
   take one of my canvases from my brother’s place if you wish, if you still have the idea of making a collection for your native country one day. You’ll remember that I’ve already spoken to you about it, that it was my great desire to give you one for this purpose. How is our friend Macknight? If he’s still with you, or if there are others with you whom I’ve had the pleasure of meeting, give them my warm regards. Above all, please remember me to Mrs Russell and believe me, with a handshake in thought, Yours truly, Vincent van Gogh c/o Doctor Peyron St-Rémy en Provence. My dear Mr Ginoux, Certainly I would prefer to come in person to ask you how your patient is, just as I had also hoped to come back to see you around now. But having been indisposed myself this last week, I must ask you for news of her by letter. Please don’t fail to let me know how she is – for would be worried if I didn’t have news from you by return of post. Nevertheless I have good intentions enough to come next week, however. I had news of Mr Paul again the other day, and it’s possible I may soon go and see him, especially because I also have a great desire 
   to go and make the acquaintance of my brother’s little one, who has fortunately just been born safe and sound. So for myself I’m really pleased that this is going well, all the more so because work isn’t going too badly either, having had articles on my paintings both in Belgium and in Paris where I exhibited them, and people are saying much more good things about them than I myself would wish. I’m expecting a visit from a Marseille painter any day now, so this is another reason why I don’t know precisely which day I’ll be able to come and see you. That notwithstanding, as for myself the attack I had again has 
   completely passed again, and I’m working as usual. Anyway, I hope you won’t leave me pining for your reply. Kind regards to you and to Mrs Ginoux, and all my wishes for her speedy recovery. Handshake to both of you and to our other friends, and believe me Yours truly, Vincent van Gogh Dear Mr Aurier, Thank you very much for your article in the Mercure de France, which greatly surprised me. I like it very much as a work of art in itself, I feel that you create colours with your words; anyway I rediscover my canvases in your article, but better than they really are — richer, more significant. However, I feel ill at ease when I reflect that what you say should be applied to others rather than to me. For example, to Monticelli above all. Speaking of ‘he is – as far as I know – the only painter who perceives the coloration of things with such intensity, with such a metallic, gem-like quality’2 – if you will please go and see a particular bouquet by Monticelli at my brother’s place – bouquet in white, forget-me-not blue and orange3 – then you will feel what I mean. But for a long time the best, the most astonishing Monticellis, have been in Scotland, in England. In a museum in the north however – the one in Lille I think, there must still be a marvel by him, far richer and certainly no less French than Watteau’s Departure for Cythera. At present Mr Lauzet is in the process of reproducing around thirty Monticellis. Here you have it, as far as I know there is no colourist who comes so straight and directly from Delacroix; and yet it is likely, in my opinion, that Monticelli only had Delacroix’s colour theories at second hand; in particular he had them from Diaz and Ziem. It seems to me that his, Monticelli’s, artistic temperament is exactly that of the author of the Decameron – Boccaccio – a melancholy man, an unhappy, rather resigned man, seeing high society’s party pass by, the lovers of his day, painting them, analyzing them, he – the outcast. Oh! He does not imitate Boccaccio any more than Henri Leys imitated the primitives. Well, this was to say that things seem to have strayed onto my name that you would do better to say of Monticelli, to whom I owe a great deal. Next I owe a great deal to Paul Gauguin, with whom I worked for a few months in Arles, and whom, besides, I already knew in Paris. Gauguin, that curious artist, that stranger whose bearing and gaze vaguely recall Rembrandt’s Portrait of a man in the La Caze gallery, that friend who likes to make one feel that a good painting should be the equivalent of a good deed, not that he says so, but anyway it is difficult to spend time with him without thinking of a certain moral responsibility. A few days before we parted, when illness forced me to enter an asylum, I tried to paint ‘his empty place’. It is a study of his armchair of dark, red-brown wood, the seat of greenish straw, and in the absent person’s place a lighted candlestick and some modern novels. If you have the opportunity, as a memento of him, please go and look a little at this study again, which is entirely in broken tones of green and red. You may perhaps then realize that your article would have been more accurate and – it would seem to me – thus more powerful – if in dealing with the question of the future ‘painting of the tropics’ and the question of colour, you had done justice to Gauguin and Monticelli before talking about me. For the share that falls or will fall to me will remain, I assure you, very secondary. And then, I would also have something else to ask of you. Supposing that the two canvases of sunflowers that are presently at the Vingtistes14 have certain qualities of colour, and then also that they express an idea symbolizing ‘gratitude’. Is this any different from so many paintings of flowers that are more skilfully painted and which people do not yet sufficiently appreciate, père Quost’s Hollyhocks, Yellow Irises? The magnificent bouquets of peonies which Jeannin produces in abundance? You see, it seems to me so difficult to separate Impressionism from 
   other things, I cannot see the point of so much sectarian thinking as we have seen these last few years, but I fear its absurdity. And, in closing, I declare that I do not understand that you spoke of Meissonier’s infamies. It is perhaps from that excellent fellow Mauve that I have inherited a boundless admiration for Meissonier; Mauve was endless in his praise for Troyon and Meissonier – a strange combination. This is to draw your attention to how much people abroad admire, without attaching the slightest importance to what unfortunately so often divides artists in France. What Mauve often repeated was something like this, ‘if you want to do colour you must also know how to draw a fireside or an interior like Meissonier’. I shall add a study of cypresses for you to the next consignment I send to my brother, if you will do me the pleasure of accepting it as a memento of your article. I am still working on it at the moment, wanting to put in a small figure. The cypress is so characteristic of the landscape of Provence, and you sensed it when saying: ‘even the colour black’. Until now I have not been able to do them as I feel it; in my case the emotions that take hold of me in the face of nature go as far as fainting, and then the result is a fortnight during which I am incapable of working. However, before leaving here, I am planning to return to the fray to attack the cypresses. The study I have intended for you depicts a group of them in the corner of a wheatfield on a summer’s day when the mistral is blowing. It is therefore the note of a certain blackness enveloped in blue moving in great circulating currents of air, and the vermilion of the poppies contrasts with the black note. You will see that this constitutes more or less the combination of tones of those pretty Scottish checked cloths: green, blue, red, yellow, black, which once appeared so charming to you as they did to me, and which alas one scarcely sees any more these days. In the meantime, dear sir, please accept my grateful thanks for your article. If I were to come to Paris in the spring I shall certainly not fail to come and thank you in person. Vincent van Gogh When the study I send you is dry right through, also in the impasto, which will not be the case for a year – I should think you would do well to give it a good coat of varnish. And between times it should be washed several times with plenty of water to get out the oil completely. This study is painted in full Prussian blue, that colour about which people say so many bad things and which nevertheless Delacroix used so much. I think that once the Prussian blue tones are really dry, by varnishing you will obtain the dark, the very dark tones needed to bring out the different dark greens. I do not quite know how this study should be framed, but as I really want it to make one think of those dear Scottish fabrics, I have noticed that a very simple flat frame, bright orange lead, creates the desired effect with the blues of the background and the dark greens of the trees. Without this there would perhaps not be enough red in the canvas, and the upper part would appear a little cold. Dear Mother, I’ve been meaning to answer your letter for days, but didn’t get round to writing because I was painting from morning till night, and so the time passed. I imagine that your thoughts, like mine, are with Jo and Theo. How glad I was when the news came that it had gone well; very good thing Wil stayed. I’d much rather that he’d called his boy after Pa, whom I’ve thought about so often these days, than after me, but anyway, as it’s been done now I started right away to make a painting for him, to hang in their bedroom. Large branches of white almond blossom against a blue sky. I thank you for the news about Cor. You won’t forget to send him my regards when you write, will you? What you write about Aunt Mina, that she bears her pain with so much patience, touched me. You must be back in Leiden again by now. The last few days we’ve had rather miserable weather here, but today it was a real spring day, and the fields of young wheat and the lilac hills in the distance so beautiful, and the almond trees are beginning to blossom everywhere. I was really rather surprised at that article they wrote about me3 — Isaäcson wanted to do it some time ago4 and I asked him not to put pen to paper; I was saddened by it when I read it because it’s so exaggerated; it’s not like that — precisely what sustains me in my work is the feeling that there are several people who are doing exactly the same as I, and so why an article about me and not about those 6 or 7 others etc.?
   Now I must confess that later, when my surprise had abated somewhat, I felt very heartened by it at times; yesterday, what’s more, Theo informed me that they’d sold one of my paintings in Brussels for 400 francs. In comparison with other prices, including the Dutch ones, this isn’t much, but that’s why I try to be productive in order to be able to keep working at reasonable prices. And if we have to try to earn our living with our hands, I have an awful lot of expenses to make up for. The letter from Wil and you just arrived, thank you very much for it. I should have written to you before but, as I said, my mind wasn’t on writing because I was so busy working. Now I’m seriously thinking of profiting from that windfall of selling that painting to go to Paris — to visit Theo. And thanks to the doctor here I feel I’ll leave calmer and healthier than I came here. Just to see how it goes outside an asylum is perhaps only a matter of course. The work may possibly be more difficult for me, though, when I’m at liberty again. Anyway, we’ll hope for the best. It’s odd that my friend with whom I worked for a time in Arles should want to go to Antwerp, and that way I’d be a little closer to you all again. But I’m afraid this isn’t entirely practicable, partly because I think it would be more expensive, and if one’s accustomed to the climate here it might also be bad for one’s health to return further north. Anyway, I’ll start by trying a week or so in Paris. Embraced in thought by your loving Vincent. My dear sister, Thanks very much for your last two letters, the one dated from Paris and today’s. What you write further about Jo’s confinement touches me, yes you were very brave and very kind to stay by her side. In circumstances where fright seizes us, I’d probably be more of a milksop than you. But anyway, the result is that the child’s here – and as I wrote to his grandmother, I’ve started painting for him these last few days – a large sky-blue canvas against which branches covered in blossoms stand out. Possible that I may see him soon – I hope so at least – towards the end of March. I’m going to try to go to Arles once more tomorrow or the day after tomorrow to see if I can bear the journey and ordinary life without the attacks recurring. Perhaps in my case I must strengthen my resolve not to want to have a feeble mind. Naturally, through continual brain-work, the thoughts of an artist sometimes take on something of the exaggerated and eccentric. I found Mr Aurier’s article2 – leaving aside whether I deserve what he says of me – in itself very artistic, very curious – but it’s rather like this that I ought to be than the sad reality of what I feel myself to be. I wrote to him that in any event it seemed to me that Monticelli and Gauguin were rather like that, that it therefore seemed to me that the share which was owing to me would be only secondary, very secondary. These ideas of which he speaks aren’t mine, for in general the Impressionist artists are all like this, under the same influence, and we’re all of us somewhat neurotic. This makes us very sensitive to colour and its particular language, its effects of complementaries, contrasts, harmony.
   But when I read the article it made me almost sad as I thought: should be like this and I feel so inferior. And pride intoxicates like drink, when one is praised and has drunk one becomes sad, or anyway I don’t know how to say how I feel it, but it seems to me that the best work one could do would be that carried out in the family home without self-praise. And then among artists, people’s friendly dispositions aren’t always enough. Either someone’s qualities are exaggerated or he’s over-neglected. However, I very much want to believe that basically Justice is in better health than it appears to be. One really must be able to laugh sometimes, and make merry a little or even a lot. I think you were lucky to see Degas at his home. I have a portrait of an Arlésienne on the go in which I’m seeking an expression different from that of Parisian women. Ah Millet! Millet! How that fellow painted humanity and the ‘something on high’, familiar and yet solemn. These days, to think that  that fellow wept as he started painting, that Giotto, that Angelico painted on their knees, Delacroix so utterly sad and moved... almost smiling. Who are we Impressionists to act like them already? Soiled in the struggle for life... ‘who will give back to the soul that which the breath of revolutions has taken away’ – that’s the cry of a poet of the other generation who seemed to have a premonition of our present weaknesses, our sicknesses, our confusions. And I say it often, are we as brand new as the old Belgian, Henri Conscience? Ah, that’s why I was pleased with the success in Brussels, because of that Kempen of Antwerp11 that I still try to recall from time to time in the calm furrows of the fields 
   while feeling myself become a most degenerate child. Thinking like this, but very far off, the desire comes over me to remake myself and try to have myself forgiven for the fact that my paintings are, however, almost a cry of anguish while symbolizing gratitude in the rustic sunflower. You can see that I’m not yet reasoning well – it’s better to know how to calculate what a pound of bread and a quarter of coffee are worth, the way the peasants know. And here we are again. Millet set the example by living in a cottage, keeping in well with people without our lapses of pride and eccentricity. So rather a little wisdom than a lot of gusto. So, just like then. I hope to write to you again soon – look after yourself, and Mother too. In Paris I hope to do a few portraits, I’ve always had the belief that through portraits one learns to reflect. It isn’t what pleases art lovers the most, but a portrait is something almost useful and sometimes pleasant, like pieces of furniture one knows, they recall memories for a long time. I kiss you affectionately in thought. If our other sisters would also like to have canvases13 you can ask Theo for others, and you could choose them according to your taste. Once again warm regards, and good handshake. Yours truly, Vincent. I don’t hate it at all that a few more canvases should go to Holland, as you know, if the opportunity arises. Dear mother and sister, This is the first time that I can bring myself to write after 2 months’ indisposition. Until today I could bring myself neither to read your letters nor to write, and the doctor not being at home I can’t get the letters and a package from you today, but meanwhile I don’t want to put off thanking you most heartily for both. I sincerely hope that all is well with you both, and with Anna and Lies too. I wrote to Theo today and sent him several paintings, some of which he’ll probably send you. So I’ve been unable to work just at the best time in the spring, and so things aren’t going too well. But what is a body to do about it? Not every change is for the better, but I’m really longing to get away from here; it’s hard to bear what one endures here.
   For a few days now I’ve been busy painting a field in the full sunshine with yellow dandelions. And while my illness was at its worst, I still painted, among other things a reminiscence of Brabant, cottages with mossy roofs and beech hedges on an autumn evening with a stormy sky, the sun setting red in reddish clouds. And a turnip field with women lifting turnips in the snow. I’ve asked Theo to send me my old drawings, in so far as he still has them. Do you still happen to have any of my old studies and drawings? Even if they’re no good in themselves, they can refresh my memory and provide information for new work, but I don’t, for instance, need the ones you have hanging up. They’re much more likely to be scratches of peasant figures. But it’s not important enough for you to spend a long time looking for them.
   I sincerely hope you’re both well, and more soon. Believe me, I think of you often, and embraced in thought. Your loving Vincent. When I heard that my work was having some success and read that article7 I was immediately afraid that I’d regret it — it’s almost always the case that success is the worst thing that can happen in a painter’s life. My dear Mr Ginoux, This is to ask you to please send by goods train my two beds and the bed linen that are still at your place. I think it will be wise to empty the palliasses, for straw will cost as much in transportation charges as it would to buy some new. The rest of the furniture, my word, there is, for example, the mirror, which I’d very much like to have. You could stick strips of paper onto it to prevent it breaking. But the two chests of drawers, chairs, table, you can keep them for your trouble, and if there are any additional expenses you must let me know. I very much regret having fallen ill on the day I came to Arles to take my leave of you all2 – after that I was ill for 2 months and unable 
   to work. At present, though, I’m completely recovered again. But I’m going to return to the north, and so, my dear friends, I shake your hands very firmly in thought, and those of the neighbours, and please believe that up there I’ll still think of you all often, for it’s true, as Mrs Ginoux says, that when people are friends they are so for a long time. If by chance you should see the Roulins, don’t forget to give them my warm regards. So I’ll finish this letter hoping that Mrs Ginoux is completely recovered from her indisposition, and shaking your hand again. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent Please send the beds to Monsieur V. van Gogh Paris By goods train to be kept at station depot. 
   I’m only planning to stay in Paris for a fortnight at the most, then I’m going to work in the countryside, that’s why take good care to put on the address to be kept at station depot. Apart from that, if you were to write to me, my address in Paris is 18 boulevard Montmartre3 Maison Boussod & Co. Dear Mother, Thank you very much for your last letter, which I haven’t answered yet. Wil told me that you’d been to Nuenen again, which I can understand so very well, and am already longing to hear from you how you found things there and visited old friends. Time passes quickly, although some days drag. And it was with much interest that I heard that Wil’s been working in the Walloon hospital. I didn’t actually intend to go back to Paris again; I would have stayed there another year had it not been that the last time I wasn’t well I definitely had to attribute it in part to the effect that other people’s illness had on me. Why I decided that it was time to change surroundings, if I wanted to preserve my capacity for work, such as it is, and what remains to me of common sense. I wrote that to Dr Peyron this very day. I’d had words with him about it, but we still parted on good terms, and he’d asked Theo for news of me. I was very fond of him, and for his part he made a distinction to my advantage between me and others of his patients. 
   And it’s the case that if I ever wanted to go back it would be as if I were with friends. But the pleasure of seeing Theo again and meeting Jo, who seems to me sensible and warm-hearted and uncomplicated, and my new little namesake, and further to be back among painters and immersed again in all the conflict and discussion and above all work in the painters’ little world of their own, all this distraction has a favourable effect, it seems to me, in so far as the symptoms of the malady (which are like its thermometer) have disappeared altogether recently — although I’ve learned that one may not make too much of that. The doctor here has been very kind to me; I can go to his home as often as I like, and he’s very well informed about what’s going on among painters these days. He’s very nervous himself; most probably that hasn’t improved since his wife’s death. He has two children, a girl of 19 and a boy of 16. He tells me that in my case working is still the best way to keep on top of it.
   Well, in the last fortnight or 3 weeks that I was in St-Rémy I worked from early in the morning until the evening without stopping. And only stayed in Paris for a few days, and got started again straightaway here. Theo was waiting for me at the station, and my first impression was that he looked paler than when I left. But talking to him and seeing how he was at home, I was encouraged — although he was coughing6 — but it really is true that he has not got worse during that time. So even if it were to remain the same, I would almost dare believe that this might already be counted as something gained. And next year he’ll get stronger rather than weaker. It’s a matter of patience, his constitution and the circumstances of his life. I heard some details about Cor from them. Give him my warmest regards when you write and tell him that I’m back again. I’d write to him, but it’s such a very different profession, his and mine. Theo’s holidays are approaching and so you’ll be seeing them again quite soon. 
   They’re also planning to come here for a couple of days, because we only saw each other briefly and hurriedly. It’s cripplingly expensive in the village here, but Gachet, the doctor, tells me it’s just the same in all the villages around here, and he’s really feeling the pinch himself compared with before. And to start with I need to stay close to a doctor whom I know. And I can pay him in paintings, and I wouldn’t be able to do that with somebody else, should something happened so that I needed his help. Well, I’ll say goodbye now because I have to go out. Hoping that you and Wil will receive this in good health, and embraced in thought. Your loving Vincent. My dear sister, I ought to have replied to your two letters long since, which I received while still in St-Rémy, but the journey, work and a host of new emotions up to today made me put it off from one day to the next. It interested me very much that you’ve cared for patients at the Walloon hospital, that’s certainly how one learns heaps of things, the best and most necessary that one can learn, and I myself regret that I know nothing, in any event not enough, about all that. It was a great happiness for me to see Theo again, to meet Jo and the little one. Theo was coughing more than when I left him more than 2 years ago, but while talking and when I saw him at close hand, however, I considered him certainly rather changed for the better, all things considered, and Jo is full of both good sense and good will. The little one is not sickly, but not strong either. It’s a good system that if one lives in a large town the woman gives birth in the country and spends the first months there with the little one. But there you are, for the first time especially, as the birth is frightening, they certainly couldn’t have done better or otherwise than they did. I hope that they’ll come here to Auvers for a few days soon. For me the journey and the rest up to now have gone well, and coming back to the north distracts me a lot. Then I’ve found in Dr Gachet a ready-made friend and something like a new brother would be – so much do we resemble each other physically, and 
   morally too. He’s very nervous and very bizarre himself, and has rendered much friendship and many services to the artists of the new school, as much as was in his power. I did his portrait the other day2 and am also going to paint that of his daughter, who is 19. He lost his wife a few years ago, which has greatly contributed to breaking him. We were friends, so to speak, immediately, and I’ll go and spend one or two days a week at his house working in his garden, of which I’ve already painted two studies, one with plants from the south, aloes, cypresses, marigolds, the other with white roses, vines and a figure. Then a bouquet of buttercups. With that I have a larger painting of the village church8 – an effect in which the building appears purplish against a sky of a deep and simple blue of pure cobalt, the stained-glass windows look like ultramarine blue patches, the roof is violet and in part orange. In the foreground a little flowery greenery and some sunny pink sand. It’s again almost the same thing as the studies I did in Nuenen of the old tower and the cemetery. Only now the colour is probably more expressive, more sumptuous. But in the last few days at St-Rémy I worked like a man in a frenzy, especially on bouquets of flowers. Roses and violet Irises.
   For Theo and Jo’s little one I brought back a rather large painting — which they’ve hung above the piano – white almond blossoms – big branches on a sky-blue background, and in their apartment they also have a new portrait of an Arlésienne. My friend Dr Gachet is decidedly enthusiastic about this latest portrait of the Arlésienne, one of which I also have myself, and about a portrait of myself, and that gave me pleasure, since he’ll drive me to do figure work and I hope he’ll find me a few interesting models to do. What I’m most passionate about, much much more than all the rest in my profession – is the portrait, the modern portrait. I seek it by way of colour, and am certainly not alone in seeking it in this way. I would like, you see I’m far from saying that I can do all this, but anyway I’m aiming at it, I would like to do portraits which would look like apparitions to people a century later. So I don’t try to do us by photographic resemblance but by our passionate expressions, using as a means of expression and intensification of the character our science and modern taste for colour. Thus the portrait of Dr Gachet shows you a face the colour of an overheated and sun-scorched brick, with a reddish head of hair, a white cap, in surroundings of landscape, blue background of hills, his suit is ultramarine blue, this brings out the face and makes it paler, despite the fact that it’s brick-coloured. The hands, hands of an obstetrician, are paler than the face.
   Before him on a red garden table yellow novels and a dark purple foxglove flower. My portrait of myself is almost like this too, but the blue is a fine southern blue and the suit is light lilac. The portrait of the Arlésienne is of a colourless and matt flesh tone, the eyes calm and very simple, the clothing black, the background pink, and she’s leaning her elbow on a green table with green books. But in the one Theo has, the clothing is pink, the background yellow-white, and the front of the open bodice is of white muslin, verging on the green. In all these bright colours, only the hair, the eyelashes and the eyes form dark patches.  The figures are dressed in bright colours and one doesn’t know if they’re costumes from now or clothes from antiquity; two women are talking (also in long, simple dresses). On one side, artistic-looking men on the other, in the centre a woman, her child in her arms, is picking a flower from an apple tree in blossom. One figure will be forget-me-not blue, another bright lemon, another soft pink, another white, another violet, the ground a meadow dotted with little white and yellow flowers. Blue distance with a white town and a river. All humanity, all nature simplified, but how it could be, if it isn’t already. This description doesn’t say anything – but by seeing the painting, by looking at it for a long time one would think one was present at an inevitable but benevolent rebirth of all things that one might have believed in, that one might have desired, a strange and happy meeting of the very distant days of antiquity with raw modernity. I was also pleased to see André Bonger again; he looked strong and calm, and my word reasoned with great accuracy on artistic things, it pleased me very much that he’d come during the days when I was in Paris. Thank you again for your letters, more soon, I kiss you in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear friends Mr and Mrs Ginoux, I want to reply straightaway to Mrs Ginoux’s letter to say that I was really pleased to have news of you. I really regret that Mr Ginoux has been injured and has suffered so much. Please have my things packed up by someone else so that he doesn’t wear himself out with it; I’ll gladly reimburse you for all the expenses you may have, but he mustn’t tire himself too much, for fear that his wound may open up. But in this way I’m counting on you sending on Saturday, for I’m awaiting it. Yes, I too really regretted not being able to come back to Arles to take my leave of you all. For you well know that I had grown attached to people and things there with you with a sincere friendship. But in the final days I was more catching the illness of the others than curing my own, the society of the other patients influenced me badly, and in the end I no longer understood anything about it. Then I felt that it was better to try a change, and anyway the pleasure of seeing my brother, his family and our painter friends again has done me good up till now, and I feel absolutely calm and in a normal state. The doctor here says that one must throw oneself fully into work and distract oneself in that way.
   The latter knows a lot about painting, and likes mine very much, he encourages me a great deal, and two three times a week he comes to spend a few hours with me to see what I’m doing. They have twice written an article about my paintings, once in a Paris newspaper and the other time in Brussels, where I had exhibited, and now, lately, again in a newspaper of my own country, Holland, and that means that a lot of people have been to see my paintings and that I’ve sold on better terms. And it isn’t over. It’s anyway certain that since I stopped drinking4 I’ve done better work than before, there’s still that which has been gained. But I still often think of you all, one can’t do as one wants in life, one must leave the place one feels most attached to – but the memories remain and one remembers – obscurely as in a mirror5 – absent friends. Thus I hope that the dispatch can take place on Saturday.
   Here is the address again. Vincent van Gogh At Ravoux’s, place de la Mairie Auvers sur Oise (Seine et Oise) By goods train In this way there can’t be any mistakes. And I thank you in advance for your trouble, but let Ginoux get a man to do the packing and not wear himself out. I shall reimburse you the costs. Wishing you good health and complete recovery, most cordial greetings. Vincent van Gogh. Dear Mother, It struck me in your letter that you said that seeing things again in Nuenen you ‘were grateful that it had once been yours’ — and were now content to leave everything to the others. Through a glass, darkly1 — it has remained thus; life and the why of parting and passing away and the persistence of turmoil, one understands no more of it than that. For me life might well remain solitary. I haven’t perceived those to whom I’ve been most attached other than through a glass, darkly. And yet there’s a reason why there’s sometimes more harmony in my work nowadays. Painting is something in itself. Last year I read somewhere that writing a book or making a painting was the same as having a child. I don’t dare claim that for myself, though; I’ve always thought the latter was the most natural and best thing — only if it were so and if it were the same. That’s why I sometimes do my utmost best, even though it’s precisely that work that’s the least understood, and it’s the only tie that links the past and the present for me.
   There are a lot of painters here in the village; next door a whole family of Americans who paint day in and day out, but I haven’t seen any of their work yet, and it’s usually just all too weak. Theo, his wife and his child were here on Sunday and we lunched at Dr Gachet’s. Then my little namesake had pretty much his first encounter with the animal kingdom, since there are 8 cats, 3 dogs, as well as hens, rabbits, ducks, pigeons &c. in great numbers around the place. But I don’t think he understands very much of it for the present. But he looked well, and Theo and Jo too. It was a very reassuring feeling for me to be more in their vicinity again. You’ll probably be seeing them again soon too. Thanks once again for your letter, and I hope you and Wil keep well. Embraced in thought. Your loving Vincent My dear sister, I’m adding a few words for you to Mother’s letter. Last Sunday I had a visit from Theo and his family, I find it most agreeable to be less far away from them. Lately I’ve been working a lot and quickly; by doing so I’m trying to express the desperately swift passage of things in modern life. Yesterday in the rain I painted a large landscape viewed from a height in which there are fields as far as the eye can see, different types of greenery, a dark green field of potatoes, between the regular plants the lush, violet earth, a field of peas in flower whitening to the side, a field of pink-flowered lucerne with a small figure of a reaper, a field of long, ripe grass, fawn in hue, then wheatfields, poplars, a last line of blue hills on the horizon, at the bottom of which a train is passing, leaving behind it an immense trail of white smoke in the greenery. A white road crosses the canvas. On the road a little carriage and white houses with stark red roofs beside this road. Fine rain streaks the whole with blue or grey lines. There’s another landscape with vineyards and meadows in the foreground, the roofs of the village coming behind.
   And another one with nothing but a green field of wheat which extends up to a white villa surrounded by a white wall with a single tree. I’ve done the portrait of Mr Gachet with an expression of melancholy which might often appear to be a grimace to those looking at the canvas. And yet that’s what should be painted, because then one can realize, compared to the calm ancient portraits, how much expression there is in our present-day heads, and passion and something like waiting and a shout. Sad but gentle but clear and intelligent, that’s how many portraits should be done, that would still have a certain effect on people at times. There are modern heads that one will go on looking at for a long time, that one will perhaps regret a hundred years afterwards. If I were ten years younger, with what I know now, how much ambition I would have for working on that. In the given conditions I can’t do very much, I neither frequent nor would know how to frequent sufficiently the sort of people I would like to influence. I do hope to do your portrait one day. I’m very curious to have another letter from you, more soon, I hope, I kiss you affectionately in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. Dear mother and sister, Sincere thanks for your kind letters, which gave me a great deal of pleasure. For the present I feel calmer than last year, and the turmoil in my head has really abated so much. I’ve always believed that, incidentally; that seeing the old surroundings again would have this effect. I often think of you both, and would very much like to see you again. Very good that Wil’s started working in the hospital. And that she says — the operations weren’t as bad as she expected, precisely because she appreciates the means of lessening the pain, and the way many doctors endeavour to do what has to be done simply and sensibly and with kindness — well I call that looking at things the right way and — having faith. 
   But precisely for one’s health, as you say — it’s very necessary to work in the garden and to see the flowers growing. For my part, I’m wholly absorbed in the vast expanse of wheatfields against the hills, large as a sea, delicate yellow, delicate pale green, delicate purple of a ploughed and weeded piece of land, regularly speckled with the green of flowering potato plants, all under a sky with delicate blue, white, pink, violet tones. I’m wholly in a mood of almost too much calm, in a mood to paint that. I sincerely hope that you’ll have really happy days with Theo and Jo and, like me, you’ll see how well they look after the baby, who looks well. 
   How big Anna’s children must be by now. Regards for today, I must get out and work, all embraced in thought. Your loving Vincent  This little church is a remarkable remnant of an old Augustinian foundation (Austin Friars) dating from at least 1354, if not from 100 years earlier. The Dutch congregation had held its religious services here since 1550, by virtue of a voluntary gift of Edward VI. A winter evening At sunset all the forest seems as though In contemplation; clumps of russet oaks, Small junipers, sparse holly bushes,  And not a leaf doth tremble in the light. The only sound, a bird, belated toiler In the distant stand of ancient chestnut trees; Across the mighty, peaceful woods we hear The yaffle, with his bill’s staccato hammering.  Strange bird, familiar to this man who passes by In sunset’s pure, calm glimmering. ’Tis not an old man, feet dragging as he goes, His back bent low, drawn on weary legs. ’Tis is a rude fellow from the forest comes, Laden with dead wood. His stride is long and firm, He’s seen the sun, like a great orange in the sky, That yonder sinks into the grass and disappears.  Cheerfully he goes; pondering in his inmost heart  Some source of happiness – into the clear, cold sky Rises a plume of smoke, a long, straight plume.  His old mask, rugged and weather-worn, lights up. Night may have fallen by the time he gains That fold of ground where the horizon ends, But on his back he has a goodly beech-wood fire, To brighten every corner of the house. There, beneath a mossy roof, door and window closed At bedtime, his children with delight Will open wide their eyes, dazzled by the flames, When off their small pink feet he takes the shoes. A. Lemoyne1 Afternoon in February The day is ending The night descending The marsh is frozen The river dead. Through clouds like ashes The red sun flashes On village windows That glimmer red. And through the meadows Like fearful shadows Slowly passes a funeral train. Longfellow1 Three kingsdaughters fair Fly away my heart away Sweet appleblossoms bloom So sweet so sweet. Ah says the eldest one Fly away my heart away. The days began so sweet So sweet. Ah says the second one Fly away my heart away Far off I hear the drum So sweet. Ah says the youngest one Fly away my heart away ’t Is my true love my own So sweet. Freely ye have received, freely give. To Mr Jules Breton at Courrières1 It was about 25 years ago that a man from Granville left for England.  After his father’s death, his brothers fell out over the inheritance, and attempted above all to deprive him, in particular, of his share. Tired of quarrelling, he gave up his share to them and left as a poor man for London, where he obtained a post as a French teacher in a school.  He was 30 when he married an Englishwoman, a good deal younger than himself; he had 1 child, a daughter. After he had been married for 7 or 8 years, his chest complaint became worse.  One of his friends then asked him if he still had any wish, to which he replied that before he died he would like to see his own country again.  His friend paid his travelling expenses.  And so he left for Granville, deathly ill, with his wife and his 6-year-old daughter.
   There he rented a room from some poor people living near the sea.  In the evening he would have himself carried to the shore and would watch the sun setting in the sea.  One evening, seeing that he was close to death, the people advised his wife that it was time to send for the priest, so that he could give the sick man the last rites.  His wife, who was Protestant, objected, but he said, ‘let them’.  And so the priest arrived and the sick man made his confession before all the household.  Then all those present wept, hearing of this just and pure life.  Afterwards, he wished to be left alone with his wife, and when they were alone he kissed her and said, ‘I have loved you’.  And then he died.
    He loved France, Brittany especially, and nature, and he saw God in it; for that reason you should mourn him as a brother.  In many respects he was your brother, that is why I am telling you about the life of this ‘stranger on the earth’2 who nevertheless was one of its true citizens.  Farewell, Sir, think of him sometimes. I wrote the same letter to Alphonse Karr in Nice, only instead of what follows I put:3  ‘I believed I ought to tell you this, you, my friend the author of Voyage autour de mon jardin and of Clovis Gosselin, you who loved the poor lady who was with you on the boat from Lyon, you who love Normandy’s cottages, surrounded by apple trees in blossom’. To Emile Souvestre.  ‘And you, too, love Brittany and the last Bretons’. That is why I am telling you about the life of this stranger on the earth who nevertheless was one of its true citizens.   I loved that unusual and slightly sad town (Granville), which lives on deep-sea fishing of the most dangerous kind. The family knows that it is fed from the hazards of that lottery, of man’s life and death.  That adds overall a serious note to the wild character of that coast.  I have many times savoured the melancholy of evening, either when walking down to the already darkened beach, or when from the top of the town that crowns the rock, I could see the sun going down on the slightly misty horizon.  Its huge globe, often strongly marked by black and red stripes, would sink, without stopping to create fantasies in the sky, landscapes in light, which often enliven the view elsewhere.  In August, it was already autumn. There was scarcely any dusk. No sooner had the sun set than the wind would grow chill, the waves would run fast, green and dark. There was little to be seen but a few shadowy women in their black capes, lined with white. The sheep straggling on the poor pastures of the slopes that overhang the beach from 80 or 100 feet would make it sad with their plaintive bleating. Michelet, La mer7 And Naomi’s husband died, and she remained.  And Ruth said: Intreat me not to leave thee, in order to take myself from thee, for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest I will lodge. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God. Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried. May the Lord grant that nothing but death part thee from me.  So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And all the city was moved about them, and they said, Is not Naomi here? And she replied unto them: Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.  I went out full of good things and the LORD hath brought me back empty. Why then call ye me Naomi, since the LORD hath brought me low and and the Almighty hath afflicted me. How pure her features! Something sour Yet charming played about her untamed lip; She was indeed the daughter of the shore, Strong, as if tempered by the exhalations of the sea. Jules Breton9 You are eating well, aren’t you? Be sure and eat as much bread as you like. Good-night, I have to go and polish my boots for tomorrow. The clock has struck the hour to leave! In front of the cottages stands a handsome young man, his traveller’s stick across his shoulder, a bag on his back. His glance, usually so bright, wanders slowly about him; his expression is calm, and everything about him seems to suggest great peace of mind; and yet his heart is beating fast, and his weighed-down bosom painfully rises and falls. His mother grips one of his hands and pours out upon him the signs of the most ardent affection; the poor woman does not weep; her cheeks tremble under the effort she makes to hide her sorrow. She smiles at her child to comfort him, but her smile, forced and pained, is sadder than the most heart-rending cries. The other widow is busy calming the little boy, and tries to convince him that Jean will come back soon; but the child has understood from the sadness that has overcome his family for the past year that separation is a terrible misfortune, and now he is crying loudly. Inside, the grandfather and Catherine are making the last preparations for the journey: they hollow out a rye loaf and fill it with butter. They go outside with the provisions for the journey and stand near the young man. The cowshed is open; the bull looks sadly at his master, and from time to time makes a soft, melancholy lowing; it is as if the animal understands what is about to happen. Everything is ready: he is about to leave. He has already squeezed his mother’s hand with a harder grip and taken a step forward; but he casts his gaze around him, casts an affectionate glance over the humble cottage that held his cradle, the heath and woods that witnessed his childhood and the arid fields so often watered with the sweat of his youth! Then his eye meets in turn the eyes of all those whom he loves, and those of that bull, too, companion of his hard labours; he covers his face with his hand, hides the tears that run down his cheeks, and says in a voice than can scarcely be understood: Farewell. He raises his head, shakes the thick hair that falls over his neck like a mane, and steps firmly forward. But they all follow him; the moment of separation has not yet come. At a certain point on the way to the village, at the place where the roads cross, stands a lime tree, on which is hung an image of the Holy Virgin. Trine put it there on a beautiful May evening, and Jean made a prie-dieu of turf at the foot of the tree. It is in this holy place, where every day, one of them would come to thank and to praise God, that the heart-rending words of farewell will escape their trembling lips… In the distance can already be seen the lime tree, the point at which the inevitable separation must begin. The young man slows his pace, while his mother, still lavishing caresses upon him, says: Jean, my son, never forget what I have told you. Always have God before your eyes, and never fail to say your prayers before you go to bed. As long as you do that, you will always be good; but if it should happen that one evening you forget to pray, think of me the next day, think of your mother, and you will be good and brave again; for the man who thinks of God and of his mother, is protected from all evil, my dear child. I shall always, always, think of you, my mother, said the young man with a sigh, but in a calm voice; if I am sad, and I lose courage, your memory will be my support and my consolation; and I feel it, I shall be unhappy, I love you all too dearly. 
   And then you mustn’t swear, you know, or lead a bad life. You’ll go to church, won’t you? You’ll give us news about your Health as often as possible, and you won’t forget that the smallest word from her child makes a mother happy, isn’t that so? Oh, I’ll say a prayer every day to your blessed guardian Angel, praying that he will never abandon you! Jean is deeply moved by his mother’s soft, penetrating voice; he dare not look at her, so much is he struck at this solemn moment by the worthy woman’s clear look: it is with bowed head that he listens. His only answer is from time to time a tighter handclasp, and a long sigh, with which now and then are mingled the words, Mother, dear Mother! They approached the crossroads in silence; the grandfather stood on the other side of the young man, and said to him in a grave voice: Jean, my boy, you’ll do your duty without reluctance and with love, won’t you? You’ll be obedient to your superiors, and you’ll put up with an injustice without complaining about it, if one should be done to you? You’ll be considerate and obliging to everyone, you’ll show you’re willing, and you’ll carry out courageously all the orders you’re given? Then God will help you, your officers and comrades will love you. Trine, his mother, and the little boy were already under the lime tree, praying on their knees on the turf bench. Jean had no time to reply to his grandfather’s recommendations; his Mother drew him towards the bench. They all knelt and prayed with hands raised to heaven. The wind murmurs softly in the branches of the pines, the spring sunshine gilds the sandy road with its joyful rays, the birds sing their gay song; and yet a solemn silence reigns, for one can clearly hear the prayers rising from around the lime tree... It is done; they all rise, but from every eye falls a torrent of tears. The mother embraces her son while giving heart-rending cries, and though the others’ arms were already opened wide for the sad farewell embrace, she does not let her child go, she staunches with her kisses the tears that bathe his cheeks, and utters unintelligible words of anxiety and love, and she weeps on his shoulder. At last, the poor woman, worn out, exhausted and still weeping, goes and sinks down on the bench. Jean hastily kisses his grandfather and Trine’s mother; he releases himself with gentle force from the embrace of his despairing little brother, runs back to his mother, presses her tightly in his arms, places a kiss on her forehead and shouts in an agonizing voice: Farewell! And without daring to look back, he walks rapidly in the direction of the village, until at the corner of the wood, he has disappeared from his family’s sight. (Conscience, Le conscrit)1 Evening song. Oh play another song for me Old man, honest and true, Try and see if one sweet chord Can move my heart anew. The sick child prays, the old man plays His song had never been so tender, Nor, like now, so magical: It filled him, too, with wonder. There trills a chord so heavenly It moves the old man’s heart. The organ stops, the dear child’s soul This earthly vale departs.  A longing for sanctification2 Who shall free us fully and for ever From the body of this death, bent beneath the yoke? How long must I still combat my nature Ere this heart from sinful service be revoked? That God my God would be, I pledged my troth With singleness of mind Him would I follow But I was tried – forgotten was my oath I was tempted – and my foot did falter. No, with my own strength I shan’t learn to conquer Soul, confess your weakness, self-deceit, take flight! A child’s heart must be shaped by the Father The Master be the pupil’s guiding light. Well then, Father, let your love be my teacher My Master, take my hand, and show your standard I stood alone – and fell: now we’re together I succumbed, but win behind your vanguard. Only now do I feel strong, when with weakness stricken Powerless in myself, but in the Lord, almighty! Sin may tempt, the evil passions quicken, Thou castest down all foes, O God in me! I am grieved, but it’s a godly sadness A night-cloud – tinged all round with dawn’s bright crimson I weep, Lord, though my heart is full of gladness I bow my head – but, Father, in thy bosom. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise.    The pilgrimage4 Homesickness flowed through The heart of a pilgrim, Seeking the heavenly Jerusalem. City of pleasures, Of joy everlasting, Which once God’s angel Had promised to him. Crystal-clear rivers, May your placid waters Show the reflection Of this lovely sight. Glittering mountains, From far you behold it, The place that my soul Doth ease and invite.  I hear there the chiming Of bells as though ringing. The sunset suffuses The woods with its glow. If I only had wings Like a dove I should glide, And fly fast through the sky,  To you, city, I’d go. Sanctified wistfulness  Softens my spirit, And vehement yearnings Rise up from my heart. With weariness sinking On his bed of flowers, He gazes with longing On those distant parts. Wide, oh too wide Is the distance between us. Long is the journey, I am overwhelmed. Dreams of enchantment Unveil the delightfulness,  Give me the joys Of the heavenly realm. Looming vault Now opens: an Angel, Shining like silver, Doth kindly descend, Speaking thus: Would God  Deny you the power? He who before made you Yearn without end?  Silent delights and the sweetest illusions, May weaklings derive from them True nourishment. Perpetual striving Is manly and noble. It leads to the target, Makes real the pretence. Sweet as the fragrance Of flowers he vanishes, Up springs the pilgrim Made strong by his words. He wanders down difficult  Paths with great courage Till, dazzling, the heavenly gates Do emerge. It opens its wings Like the arms of the Mother,  Who longs for her son  And his advent attends. Jubilant singing Greets the ears of the weary, As bravely his journey Is brought to an end. Pious parents are a blessing, Child, you can’t thank them enough! They pave for you the straight and narrow Path, which many find so tough. Oh the skylark ever chirping On thy nimble wings now circling Flying higher in the sky. Singing hymns let us unite Rising in the glorious light Freed from fetters now am I.    The king on the tower platform7 The hills lie ayonder All misty and grey The valleys are sunken In nocturnal shade. All round me is slumber Not one sign of woe Is brought to disturb me By breezes that blow. I’ve ever looked after Each one’s happiness I’ve drunk of the cup In both need and distress. The night time has fallen The firmament glows I long for the peace that Most pleases my soul. O glimmering starlight The Writ from on high With love you attract me And capture my eye. Rapturous music Of heavenly choirs Scarce heard, yet caressing And soothing my ears. My hair’s turning grey now My ardour doth pall My armour now hangs Full of rust on the wall. Justly I’ve spoken,  And justice I’ve done Oh when will my hour Of peace finally come? The peace which my spirit Doth crave with all might Abide now no longer O most blessed night! May I gaze upon stars  Which more wonderfully glow, And be able to hear sounds Much louder than now. Winter morning8 ’Twas a cheerless winter morn Of sunlight not a glimmer. At intervals a death-knell rang And pierced the misty shimmer. How dull it sounded, that one bell, Given a brief ringing, But soon one heard a hoarse voice raised To sing a song of mourning. It was a destitute old man They carried to his grave. His burial was as grim and drab As once had been his days. Now he’s in God’s glorious light, The choirs of angels sing. Rejoicing now, their fulsome tones Throughout the world shall ring. The larks9 Welcome sight of larks ascending, Skyward paths forever wending, Some alight beside the stream, Others frolic in the tree. To sing God’s praise is the delight Of one who from my heart takes flight! Cemetery in spring10 Resting place of our departed, Don the festive dress of spring. Hide thyself behind rose-petals, Green grass be thy covering. Close the gate and all thorn-hedges, Open up thy tombs for me. Very well then, I am ready, Even though this vernal splendour Urges me to labour further. Evening clouds11 Clouds during the day so dark In the western sky do hover, Glowing with a purple shimmer Pierced by sunsets’ golden light. In like way, foretells my heart, Soon or late, when I, death-stricken, Leave this life, my soul will quicken And what now is dark make bright. Be of good courage, and He shall strengthen thine heart. Behold, Satan hath desired to have our soul, that he may sift us as wheat. And the end shall not be yet. 1 Cor XI:23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which He was betrayed took bread: and when He had given thanks, He brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of Me. After the same manner also He took the cup, when He had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in My blood, which is shed for you for the remission of sins, this do ye, as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, in remembrance of Me, and do shew the Lord’s death till he come. Luke XXII. And He came out, and went, as He was wont, to the mount of Olives; and His disciples also followed Him. And when He was at the place, He said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. And he was withdrawn from them about a stone’s cast, and kneeled down, and prayed, saying, Father! if Thou be willing, remove this cup from Me! nevertheless not My will, but Thy will, be done. And there appeared an angel unto Him, strengthening Him. And being in an agony He prayed more earnestly: and His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground. And when He rose up from prayer, and was come to His disciples, He found them sleeping for sorrow. Then Pilate questioned Him in many words, but He answered him nothing. And Pilate saith, Knowest Thou not that I have power to crucify Thee, and have power to release Thee? And Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at all against Me, except it were given thee from Above. Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man. Scheveningen. Holland’s coasts are hidden by ranges of dunes that deprive the traveller of the sight of the waters. After a long and arduous climb up these sandy hills, raise your eyes, and there’s the sea! This North Sea was poorly known to the ancients, who imagined it in terms of fables and superstitious terrors. Even Tacitus pictured it as being churned up by constant winds and inhabited by monsters. The fact is that its coasts are stormy, and its colour is variable; in the foreground it is a scummy yellow that looks like dirty washing water, further off, a weak green, and in the distance, a faded blue that blends into the wavy line of the sky. Here and there, great clouds cast their sombre shadows obliquely over this indistinct mirror. No rocks, no cliffs break the force of the waves: this sea rolls on its sandy bed, which it had made for itself and which it is constantly expanding. The physiognomy of Holland’s coasts varies very little: sand, and more sand, water and more water, sky and more sky. On these coasts, which give the impression of being limitless, there stand, between the mouth of the Maas and Den Helder, a number of fishing villages. The most interesting of these villages is Scheveningen. The beach at Scheveningen is frequented by bathers during the summer. At that time of year, a pretty village, linked with The Hague by a tree-lined road, and a promenade built of timber that disappears among the dunes, welcomes foreigners from every country. Here everything shows the effects of proximity to the Ocean. The church, which by no means lacks elegance, contains the enormous skull and a few vertebrae of a sperm whale that was cast up on the shore in a storm, in 1617. These silent fragments are like a commentary on these words of Job: “The monsters proclaim Thee, O Lord”. In the main street, which leads to the sea, are to be found several vendors of shellfish. This sea, whose voice can be heard, shows itself only when the traveller’s feet are almost at the water. The sudden delight of surprise, and the grandeur of the scene that then opens up, fully compensate for the gradation of effects found on other shores. A fishing fleet, whose smacks are beached on the sand, or riding at anchor, or scattered out at sea like the thoughts of the sea’s brain, associates the image of labour with historical memories. Here the Ocean must be proud of Holland and the Dutch; in 1673, De Ruyter defeated the English and French fleets within sight of Scheveningen.
   This little village is Holland’s Cherbourg. It has seen exiles and royal misfortunes. It was a cold January day in 1795; the fishermen were loading two boats with packages and travelling trunks; from a conveyance that appeared at the far end of the village came a man enveloped in a wide cloak and a woman carrying a child in her arms. That man was the Prince of Orange; the child was the grandson of the last Stadholder, the future King William II. In 1813, this shore once again saw and welcomed amid acclamations (the Empire had just fallen) the representative of that same family that now occupies the throne of the Netherlands. If you continue your walk along the sands to the right you will find the spa hotel, where people from The Hague come on Sunday evenings to listen to music. At nightfall, when the sea steals from the sky all its stars, it is a solemn and magnificent prospect. I have seen, in front of this hotel, a display of fireworks on the water, whose subject was, of course, the burning of a ship. I am not especially fond of rockets or Roman candles, but in this case the vulgarity of such entertainments was redeemed by its theatrical grandeur. The darkling sea was almost in itself worth the whole cost of the performance, and with its sublime din, with those tattered clouds, with the only too real catastrophes which the imagination could picture to itself in this pretended conflagration, the scene by no means lacked majesty. And yet this main street, these baths, these cafés, these hotels – all of that is not Scheveningen. A person may have spent many summers in this place and yet not know the fishing village at all. Behind some elegant dwellings, which are a true example of trompe l’oeil, are hidden narrow streets, and poor brick hovels, in which a silent and wretched population conceals itself. At the doors of these poky cubby-holes, in front of which are drying washing, nets, red shirts and strings of fish threaded on a line, there appears from time to time the figure of a woman, sad, aged and wasted by fever. Children play in the midst of all this wretchedness, as if it were one of the privileges of their age to be unaware of misfortune and poverty. The population of Scheveningen is 6,, of whom only 450 are Catholics. It should be noted that the majority of the innkeepers and fish merchants profess the Catholic faith, whereas the shipowners and the fishermen are Protestants. For the village there are two government schools, which we visited and which are kept in perfect order. The first, if truth be told, is a ward in an asylum, which holds 250 children of both sexes. 
   The children leave this first school at the age of about six, and then enter the primary school, which has 500 pupils. Teaching is shared among a head, five assistant masters and five monitors. The children are taught reading, writing, arithmetic, geography and a little history. They leave this second school at between ten and twelve years of age: the boats claim them. The fishermen’s language is a kind of patois that is fundamentally different from ordinary Dutch, and in which some linguists have believed they recognize traces of the Anglo-Saxon that seems to have been the source of the national language. Their dress, especially the women’s, is distinctive. In the winter, they wear a bodice of serge or calico, a brown serge skirt, a long cape of the same stuff and the same colour, lined in red, with a tall, stiff collar. There is something austere and monkish about this form of clothing; one must in any case admit that it is well suited to the climate and to their occupation. A large hat of coarse straw with a border of black ribbon, lined in flower-printed calico, bent slightly downward on either side and rising at the back and the front like a boat, enables them to hold up to three or four baskets on their heads. These women are tall, and robustly built, with rather plain but healthy-looking faces, blue eyes with somewhat drooping lids, and sturdy limbs. By the age of thirty they have already lost much of their freshness; their skin is weather-beaten, a condition due, no doubt, to the proximity of the sea and to their living in the dunes. The dunes form a country within the country itself; the sand reflects the sun’s rays more strongly than elsewhere; this is Holland’s Arabia.  The men are comparatively short in stature; their dress – black jacket and trousers – does not suit their bearing, which is serious, but awkward. They have round faces, short necks, usually brown and curly hair. Their great treasures are their shirt-buttons and the silver buckles which they attach to their feet and their belts. This conservatism in their dress, especially the women’s, this consistency in their physical traits, these racial characteristics that are preserved due to the concern shown by the boys and girls of Scheveningen to marry only amongst themselves, are all, perhaps, a consequence of their dealings with the sea. The Ocean, in which some poets have believed they have seen an image of inconstancy, is, on the contrary, an image of eternity; of all the elements, it is the one that has suffered the fewest vicissitudes since the beginning of the world. 
   The dawn of creation saw it born thus, and thus it still rolls today. It moves, it does not change. The Ocean sets its ever-moving stability against the forces of time that undermine the rocks, that alter the level of the continents, that transform living nature and human destinies. The ways of the fishermen who live on the coast share the nature of the Ocean. They have none of the habits of the city. The essence of their character is independence. It seems that dealings with the sea foster in them the sense of human dignity. These men have no love of the land; they need space, the free vastness of the seas, the untamed flood, the sky, blue by day, full of stars by night, the sharp north wind, the mind of a man standing upright in his actions like the ship’s mast upon the movements of the Ocean. Soldiers of toil, they love deliberately to brave the lightning’s bolt, the whinnying of the waves that run, without a bit and foaming at the mouth, about the boat’s keel. On land, they are homesick. Strangers to social conventions, they wish to be neither governed nor protected. This feeling of independence can be seen on their faces. Sailors and fishermen differ from other men in the way they carry their heads high as they walk. One would at the very least say that for them was written Ovid’s line:3 He gave man a face that looks at the sky. This love of liberty even rubs off on their religious beliefs. As we have seen, all, or almost all, of the fishermen of the coast are Protestant; they acknowledge only two books that have the right to speak to them of God: the Bible and the sea. It appears that the Ocean exerts a moral and sanctifying effect on them. Drunkenness is rare among the fishermen of Scheveningen, but even those who drink Hollands gin to excess on land abstain from any form of intemperance when they are at sea. Swearing is unknown on board a boat. The seafaring life strengthens and increases religious feelings in these simple and ignorant men. When a fishing boat sails, each fisherman takes his Bible with him. A meal is never eaten without grace being said, and is also followed by a prayer of thanks. On Sunday, if the men are at sea, they abstain from fishing, and if they are on land, the singing of the Psalms can be heard in their little houses from morning onwards. Alphonse Esquiros St Jerome’s love. Who is the maid my spirit seeks Through cold reproof, and slanders blight – Has she loves roses on her cheeks? Is her’s an eye of calm delight? No – wan and sunk with midnight prayer Are the pale looks of her I love And if by times a light be there That light is kindled from above. I choose not her mine hearts elect ’Mongst those that seek their Makers shrine In gems and garlands proudly decked As if themselves were things divine. No, heaven but faintly warms the breast That beats beneath a broidered veil. And she, who comes in glittering dress To mourn her frailty – yet is frail. Not so the faded form I prize And love because her bloom is gone The glory of those sainted eyes Is all the dress her brow puts on. But ne’er was beauties bloom so bright, So touching as that forms decay Which as the altars wavering light In holy lustre fades away. Harriet Beecher Stowe. Dear Sir, I should be obliged to receive from you in a parcel 

6 tubes1 of madder (3 rose, 3 burnt)      
1. 
guilders


And 
6 
tubes
Ultramarine ordinary
-.
 


 
8
,, 
Indigo
1.
 

 pleasure and would for had – as I feel it – by Haverman, for example. me in – something young and do not find what – I would genius – a figure of a woman bring – where some goodness is I do believe 4 Monsieur Th. van Gogh 8 cité Pigalle Paris exaggerated in the work. That parents who are ignorant from the point of view of painting should stop loving a child who’s a little different from the rest – that’s certainly a terrible misunderstanding – but even if they understood painting, how could one reproach them for it too much in this society of money and military men? That’s why, if he did his military service, it wouldn’t be more unfortunate for him, it would be to admit in good time that one has been vanquished by fate. What became of Vignon? Anyway, this is certain, it’s not a matter of putting on a proud front or having great hopes for what comes next. Let’s take the terrible realities as they are, and if I have to abandon painting I think I shall. In any case, I really want to see, one more time and with better health than two years ago, if I can’t find some sort of position. I’ve often told myself that if, two years ago, I’d had a calmer temperament like Seurat, for example, I could have resisted. 
   Who is the maid my spirit seeks3 Through cold reproof and slanders blight Has she loves roses on her cheeks Is hers an eye of calm delight? No, wan and sunk with midnight prayer As the worn looks of her I love And if by chance a light be there As fire was kindled from above I choose not her mine hearts elect Amongst those who seek their makers’ shrine In gems and garlands proudly decked As if themselves were things divine And they who come in glittering dress To mourn their frailty yet are frail No heaven but faintly warm the breast That beats beneath a broidered veil. Not so the form of her I love And... because her bloom is gone But ne’er was beauty’s bloom so bright So touching as that forms decay That like the altars wavering light In holy lustre fades away. My dear sister, For a few days now I would have liked to reply to your kind letter, which I received while still in St-Rémy. Things weren’t working out there any more, and I was becoming rather iller through the treatment. In Paris it was a great joy for me to see Theo again and to meet Jo and the little one. Jo made an excellent impression upon me, she’s charming and very simple and good. Yes it really seems to me to be going as well as possible for the moment. And as for myself, for the moment I still fear the noise and the bustle of Paris and I left immediately for the country – to an old village. Here there are roofs of mossy thatch which are superb, and of which I’ll certainly do something. 
   Then I think that the doctor to whom I’ve been recommended1 will absolutely let me be as if nothing were wrong. In the last few days at St-Rémy I worked in a frenzy. Big bouquets of flowers, violet irises, big bouquets of roses. Landscapes. It was odd to see all my canvases from the beginning again, from the time I left. But I would very much have liked you to have seen the olive groves that I’ve brought with me now, with yellow, pink, blue skies, quite different, I think that these are canvases that haven’t yet been painted like this. Up to now the others always painted them in grey. 
   I was very pleased to see the exhibition at the Champ de Mars, where there are many things I like a lot. My dear Mr Isaäcson, On returning to Paris I read the continuation of your articles on the Impressionists. Without wanting to get into a discussion on the details of the subject you have broached, it seems to me that you are conscientiously trying to tell our fellow-countrymen how matters stand, basing yourself on facts. Since perhaps you will also say a few words about me in your next article I would repeat my scruples, so that you say just only a few words, as I am decidedly certain that I shall never do important things. Although I believe in the possibility that a later generation will again and always be concerned with a continuation of interesting researches into colour and modern sentiment, parallel, equivalent to those of Delacroix, Puvis de Chavannes – and that Impressionism will be the source of it, if you like – and that the Dutch of the future will also be engaged in this struggle – all this is in the realm of the possible, and your articles certainly have their raison d’être. But I was going to wander off into vagueness – this is the why of this letter – I wanted to inform you that in the last part of my stay in the south I tried to capture a few olive groves. You are not unaware of the existing paintings of olive trees. I think it likely that there must be some in the work of Claude Monet and Renoir. But apart from this – and although I assume this exists I have not seen any of it – apart from this, what people do of olive trees is very little. 
   Well, the day is probably not far off when people will paint the olive tree in every way as they have painted the willow and the Dutch pollard willow, as they have painted the Norman apple tree since Daubigny and César de Cock. The effect of daylight, of the sky, means that there is an infinity of subjects to be drawn from the olive tree. Now I looked for some effects of opposition between the changing foliage and the tones of the sky. Sometimes the whole thing is wrapped in pure blue at the time when the tree bears pale blossoms and the numerous big blue flies, the emerald rose beetles, finally the cicadas, fly around it. Then, when the more bronzed greenery takes on riper tones the sky is resplendent and is striped with green and orange;5 or even further on in the autumn, the leaves take on the violet tones vaguely of a ripe fig, the violet effect will be displayed in full by the oppositions of the large whitening sun in a halo of clear, fading lemon. Sometimes, too, after a shower, I have seen all the sky coloured in pink and bright orange, which gave an exquisite value and coloration to the silvery greenish greys. In there, there were women, also pink, who were picking the fruit. These canvases, with a few studies of flowers, that is all I have done since our last correspondence. These flowers are an avalanche of roses against a green background, and a very large bouquet of violet Irises against yellow background, against pink background. I am increasingly beginning to feel that one may consider Puvis de Chavannes as having the importance of Delacroix, anyway that he has equal worth with the people whose genius attains a thus-far-and-no-further, forever consoling. 
   His canvas currently at the Champ de Mars, among others, appears to allude to an equivalence, to a strange and providential meeting of the very distant antiquities and raw modernity. Even more vague, more prophetic than the Delacroixs if possible, one feels moved before his canvases of recent years as though present at a continuation of all things, an inevitable but benevolent rebirth. But it is as well not to press the point on this subject when one is meditating gratefully before a painting as definitive as the sermon on the mount. Ah, He would do the olive trees of the south, He the seer. Myself, I tell you as a friend, before such a nature I feel powerless, my northern brain having been seized by a nightmare in these peaceful places, because I felt one must be better to do it. However, I did not want to remain completely without attempting an effort but it is limited to naming these two things — the cypresses – the olive trees. Let others better and more powerful than me express their symbolic language. Millet is the voice of the wheat, and Jules Breton also. Now I assure you, I can no longer think of Puvis de Chavannes without having a presentiment that one day perhaps he or another will explain the olive trees to us. Myself, I can see from afar the possibility of a new painting but it was too much for me, and it is with pleasure that I return to the north. See here, the question presents itself to my mind thus. Who are the human beings who currently inhabit the groves of olive trees, of oranges, of lemons? The peasant from there is a different thing from the inhabitant of the great wheatfields of Millet. But Millet reopened our thoughts to see the inhabitant of nature. But no one has yet 
   painted for us the current human being of the south. But when Chavannes or someone else shows us this human being, these old words will come back to us with a new meaning, blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the pure in heart, words of such impact that those of us brought up in the old towns of the north, confused and defeated, must halt a long way from the threshold of these dwellings. Then, however convinced we may be by Rembrandt’s vision, yet one asks oneself: and did Raphael want this, and Michelangelo and Da Vinci? I do not know, but I believe that Giotto, less pagan, felt it more, that great sickly fellow13 who remains as familiar as a contemporary. My dear friend Gauguin Thanks for writing to me again, my dear friend, and be assured that since my return I’ve thought about you every day. I only stayed in Paris for three days, and as the Parisian noise &c. made a pretty bad impression on me I judged it wise for my head to clear off to the countryside – otherwise I would have swiftly run round to your place. And it gives me enormous pleasure that you say that you liked the portrait of the Arlésienne based rigorously on your drawing. I tried to be respectfully faithful to your drawing while taking the liberty of interpreting through the medium of a colour the sober character and the style of the drawing in question. It’s a synthesis of an Arlésienne if you like, as syntheses of Arlésiennes are rare, take it as a work by you and me, like a summary of our months of work together. To do it I, for my part, paid with another month of illness, but I also know that it’s a canvas that will be understood by you, me and just one or two others, as we’d like it to be understood. Here my friend Dr Gachet came to it completely after two, three hesitations and says: ‘how difficult it is to be simple’. Right – I’m going to emphasize the thing even more by etching it, that thing, then that’s enough. Whoever wants it can have it.
   Have you also seen the olive trees? Now I have a portrait of Dr Gachet with the deeply sad expression of our time. If you like something like you were saying about your Christ in the Garden of Olives, not destined to be understood, but anyhow up to that point I follow you, and my brother clearly grasps this nuance. I also have a cypress with a star from down there.  A last try – a night sky with a moon without brightness, the slender crescent barely emerging from the opaque projected shadow of the earth – a star with exaggerated brightness, if you like, a soft brightness of pink and green in the ultramarine sky where clouds run. Below, a road bordered by tall yellow canes behind which are the blue low Alpilles, an old inn with orange lighted windows and a very tall cypress, very straight, very dark. On the road a yellow carriage harnessed to a white horse, and two late walkers. Very romantic if you like, but also ‘Provençal’ I think. I’ll probably make etchings of this one, and of other landscapes and subjects, reminiscences of Provence, then I’ll look forward to giving you an ensemble, a rather deliberate and studied summary. My brother says that Lauzet, who’s doing the lithographs after Monticelli, liked that head of the Arlésienne.
   So you’ll understand that having arrived in Paris a little confused I haven’t yet seen any of your canvases. But soon I hope to return there for a few days. Very pleased to learn from your letter that you’re returning to Brittany with De Haan. It’s highly likely that – if you allow me – I’ll come for a month to join you there to do a seascape or two, but especially to see you and make the acquaintance of De Haan. Then we’ll try to do something deliberate and serious, as it would probably have become if we’d been able to continue down there. Look, an idea which will perhaps suit you. I’m trying to do studies of wheat like this, however I can’t draw it –  