The Hague, 29 September 1872. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, I was glad to hear that you got back safely. I missed you the first few days, and it was strange for me not to find you when I came home in the afternoon. We spent some pleasant days together, and actually did go for some walks and see a thing or two whenever we had the chance. What terrible weather, you must feel anxious on your walks to Oisterwijk. Yesterday there were trotting races on the occasion of the exhibition, but the illumination and fireworks were postponed because of the bad weather, so it’s just as well you didn’t stay to see them. Regards from the Haanebeeks4 and the Rooses. Ever, Your loving Vincent The Hague, 13 December 1872. My dear Theo, That was good news that I just read in Pa’s letter. My hearty congratulations. I don’t doubt that it will give you pleasure, it’s such a fine firm. It will be a big change for you. I’m so glad that both of us are now in the same line of business, and in the same firm;2 we must correspond often. 
   I hope so much to see you before you leave, we’ll have a lot to talk about. I believe that Brussels is a very pleasant city, though it will seem strange at first. At all events, write to me soon. And now adieu, these are only a few words written in haste, but I just had to tell you how very glad I was. I wish you well, and believe me ever, Your loving brother Vincent I pity your having to go to Oisterwijk every day in this beastly weather. Regards from the Rooses. The Hague, January 1873 My dear Theo, I heard from home that you arrived safe and sound in Brussels, and that your first impression was good. I understand completely how strange it will be in the beginning, but be of good heart, you’ll surely succeed. You must write to me soon about how things are going and how your boarding-house suits you. I hope that the latter will be all right. Pa wrote that you’re good friends with Schmidt. Bravo, I think he’s a fine fellow, and one who’ll be sure to show you the ropes.
   How pleasant those days at Christmas were, I think of them so often; they’ll also long be remembered by you, as they were also your last days at home. You must write to me in particular about what kind of paintings you see and what you find beautiful. I’m busy now at the beginning of the year. My new year began well, I was given a monthly rise of 10 guilders, so I now earn 50 guilders a month, and on top of that I received a 50-guilder bonus. Isn’t that wonderful? I now hope to be entirely self-supporting. 
   I’m really very happy that you’re also part of this firm. It’s such a fine firm, the longer one is part of it the more enthusiastic one becomes. The beginning is perhaps more difficult than in other jobs, but keep your chin up and you’ll get along. Do ask Schmidt what the ‘Album Corot. lithographies par Emile Vernier’4 costs. We’ve been asked about it in the shop, and I know it’s in stock in Brussels. The next time I write I’ll send you my portrait;5 I had it taken last Sunday. Have you been to the Palais Ducal yet?
   Do go when you get the chance. How is Uncle Hein? I feel so sorry for him, and hope so much that he’ll get better. Give him and Aunt8 my warm regards. Did Uncle Cent9 stop off at Brussels? Well, old chap, keep well, all your acquaintances here send their regards and hope things will go well for you. Bid good-day to Schmidt and Eduard10 for me, and let me hear from you soon. Adieu Your loving brother Vincent. You know that my address is Lange Beestenmarkt 32 or Maison Goupil & Cie, Plaats. The Hague, 28 Jan. 1873 My dear Theo, It’s good that you answered me so quickly. I’m glad that things are to your liking and that you’ve been lucky with your boarding-house. Be of good heart if things sometimes get difficult, everything will come right later on, and no one can do what he really wants in the beginning. How sorry I am about Uncle Hein. I sincerely hope he’ll get better, but Theo, I fear he won’t. Last summer he was still 
   so full of ambition, and had so many plans and told me that business was going so well. It is indeed sad. Last Sunday I was at  Uncle Cor’s2 and had a very pleasant day there and, as you can well imagine, saw many beautiful things. As you know, Uncle has just been to Paris and has brought home splendid paintings and drawings. I stayed in Amsterdam on Monday morning and went to the museums again. Did you know that a large, new building will take the place of the Trippenhuis in Amsterdam? That’s fine with me; the Trippenhuis is too small, and many paintings hang in such a way that one can’t see them properly. How I’d like to see that painting by Cluysenaar. I’ve seen only a few of his paintings, and those I find very beautiful. Write and tell me whether that other painting is by Alfred Stevens, or otherwise what his Christian name is. I know the photo of the Rotta, and even saw the painting at the Brussels exhibition. Do keep me constantly informed about whatever you see, that always gives me pleasure. The album whose title you gave me isn’t the one I meant, which contains only lithographs after Corot. Thanks anyway for taking the trouble. I expect a letter from Anna soon. She’s rather lazy about writing these days. You ought to surprise her with a letter sometime, that would give her so much pleasure. You must be very busy, but that’s a good thing. 
   It’s cold here, and people are already skating on the flooded fields. I go walking as much as I can. I’m curious to know whether you’ll find an opportunity to go skating. Herewith my portrait, but don’t say anything about it when you write home. As you know, it’s for Pa’s birthday, on which I congratulate you ahead of the event. My warm regards to Uncle and Aunt, also to Mr Schmidt and Eduard. Ever your loving brother Vincent All at the Haanebeeks’, Aunt Fie’s14 and the Rooses’ send you their compliments. Adieu, I wish you well. The Hague, 17 March 1873 My dear Theo, It’s time you heard from me again, and I’m also longing to hear how you are and how Uncle Hein is doing, so I hope you’ll write to me when you can find the time. You’ll have heard that I’m going to London, and probably very soon. I do hope we’ll be able to see each other before then. I’ll go to Helvoirt at Easter2 if I possibly can, but it will depend on the nouveautés that Iterson takes along on his trip. I won’t be able to leave 
   until he gets back. Life in L. will be very different for me, for I’ll probably have to live alone in lodgings, and will therefore have to deal with many things that I needn’t trouble myself with now. I’m looking forward to seeing L. very much, as you can imagine, and yet I’m sorry to have to leave this place. I’m only just noticing how attached I am to The Hague, now that it’s been decided I must go away. Still, it can’t be helped, and I intend not to take things too hard. I think it’s wonderful for my English, which I understand well, though I don’t speak it nearly as well as I’d like.
   I heard from Anna that you had your portrait taken. If you can spare another, I commend myself. How is Uncle Hein? Certainly no better, and how is Aunt doing? Can Uncle keep himself occupied, and is he in a lot of pain? Give them my warm regards, I think of them so often. How is business with you? It must be busy, as it is here. You probably know your way around by now. How is your boarding-house? Is it still to your liking? That’s important. Above all, you must write more about the kind of things you see. Sunday a fortnight ago  I was in Amsterdam to see an exhibition of the paintings going to Vienna from here. It was very interesting, and I’m curious 
   as to the impression the Dutch will make in Vienna.  I’m very curious about the English painters, we see so little of them, because almost everything stays in England. Goupil has no gallery in London; they only supply the trade. Uncle Cent is coming here at the end of the month, I’m longing to hear more from him. The Haanebeeks and Aunt Fie8 ask after you constantly, and send you their regards. What wonderful weather we’ve been having, I’m taking advantage of it as much as I can. Last Sunday I went rowing with Willem. How much I’d have liked to stay here this summer, but we must take things as they come. And now, adieu, I wish you well, and write to me. Bid good-day to Uncle and Aunt, Schmidt and Eduard from me. As to Easter, I’m just hoping. Ever, Your loving brother Vincent Mr and Mrs Roos and Willem also send you their regards. I just received your letter, for which I thank you. I’m very pleased with the portrait, it turned out well. If I hear anything more about my trip to Helvoirt I’ll write to you immediately. It would be nice if we could arrive on the same day. Adieu. Theo, I must again recommend that you start smoking a pipe. It does you a lot of good when you’re out of spirits, as I quite often am nowadays.  The Hague, 24 March 1873 My dear Theo, Would you mind checking whether a painting by Schotel is still in Brussels? It was sent from here on consignment on 6 May 1870, but perhaps Uncle has already sent it back to Paris. If that isn’t the case, however, see that it’s sent here immediately. 
   We have every chance of selling it, but time is of the essence. I saw it last summer in your gallery, and imagine it’s probably still there. Bid good-day to Uncle and Aunt3 and Mr Schmidt and Eduard for me. You’ll have received my letter by now. Adieu, I wish you well. Vincent  The Hague, 5 May 1873 My dear Theo, You mustn’t take it amiss, old chap, that I didn’t remember your birthday. Many congratulations; I hope that things will continue to go well for you this year, and that you’ll take more and more pleasure in your work. 
   My time is drawing to a close. On Saturday I’ll go home and take my leave, and then on Sunday on to Paris. I’m afraid it’ll end up being Monday, however, and that on Sunday I’ll still be in Helvoirt. I hope I’ll be able to write to you in time about when I’ll be passing through Brussels, but it’s quite possible that I won’t be able to, as I don’t yet know for sure when I have to be in Paris at the latest. 
   How are Uncle and Aunt? Have they moved yet? Be sure to write to me soon about that, I’ll give you my address below. I’m writing in haste, as you can imagine I’m busy. Adieu, I wish you well. Give my warm regards to Uncle and Aunt, also to Mr Schmidt and Eduard. Ever your loving brother Vincent. V.W. van Gogh Care of Messrs Goupil & Co. 17 Southampton Street Strand London. Mind: V.W. van Gogh, because otherwise there’s likely to be confusion with letters for Uncle Cent, who’s only V. The Hague, 9 May 1873 My dear Theo, On Monday morning I’ll leave Helvoirt for Paris, passing through Brussels at 2:07. Do come to the station if you can; it would give me great pleasure. Before I forget, yesterday 
   I showed your portrait to Mrs Tersteeg, and she would like very much to have one. Would you have a chance to get another one and send it to me? If you can’t do it now, try to think of it some other time. Theo, you have no idea how kind to me they all are here;3 you can imagine how sorry I am to have to part from so many friends. 
   Adieu, old chap, give my warm regards to Uncle and Aunt. Goodbye for now. Vincent. Find out whether you have to be at the Station du Nord or du Midi. London, 13 June 1873. My dear Theo, You’re probably longing to hear from me, so I don’t want to keep you waiting for a letter any longer. I heard from home that you’re now staying with Mr Schmidt, and that Pa has been to see you. I sincerely hope that this will be more to your liking than your previous boarding-house, and don’t doubt that it will be. Write to me soon, I’m longing to hear from you, and tell me how you’re 
   spending your days at present, &c. Write to me especially about the paintings you’ve seen recently, and also whether anything new has been published in the way of etchings or lithographs. You must keep me well informed about this, because here I don’t see much in that genre, as the firm here is just a stockroom. I’m very well, considering the circumstances. I’ve come by a boarding-house that suits me very well for the present. There are also three Germans in the house who really love music and play piano and sing themselves, which makes the evenings 
   very pleasant indeed. I’m not as busy here as I was in The Hague, as I only have to be in the office from 9 in the morning until 6 in the evening, and on Saturdays I’m finished by 4 o’clock. I live in one of the suburbs of London, where it’s comparatively quiet. It’s a bit like Tilburg5 or some such place. I spent some very pleasant days in Paris and, as you can imagine, very much enjoyed all the beautiful things I saw at the exhibition6 and in the Louvre and the Luxembourg. The Paris branch is splendid, and much larger than I’d imagined. Especially the Place de l’Opéra. Life here is very expensive. I pay 
   18 shillings a week for my lodgings, not including the washing, and then I still have to eat in town. Last Sunday I went on an outing with Mr Obach, my superior, to Box Hill, which is a high hill (some 6 hours from L.), partly of chalk and covered with box trees, and on one side a wood of tall oak trees. The countryside here is magnificent, completely different from Holland or Belgium. Everywhere one sees splendid parks with tall trees and shrubs, where one is allowed to walk. During the Whitsun holiday12 I also took a nice trip with those Germans, but those gentlemen spend a great deal of money and I shan’t go out with them any more. I was glad to hear from Pa that Uncle H. is reasonably well. Would you give my warm regards to him and Aunt13 and give them news of me? Bid good-day to Mr Schmidt and Eduard from me, and write to me soon. Adieu, I wish you well. Vincent. My address is: Care of Messrs Goupil & Co. 17 Southampton Street Strand London. London, 20 July 1873 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, which gave me a great deal of pleasure. I’m glad you’re well and that living at Mr Schmidt’s is still to your liking. Mr Obach was pleased to make your acquaintance. I hope that in future we’ll do a lot of business with you. That painting by Linder2 is very beautiful. As to the photogravure, I know more or less how they’re made, though I haven’t seen it, and it isn’t clear enough to me to explain it. English art didn’t appeal to me much at first, one has to get used to it. There are some good painters here, though, including Millais, who made ‘The Huguenot’, Ophelia, &c., engravings of which you probably know, they’re very beautiful. Then Boughton, of whom you know the ‘Puritans going to church’ 
   in our Galerie photographique. I’ve seen very beautiful things by him. Moreover, among the old painters, Constable, a landscape painter who lived around 30 years ago, whose work is splendid, something like Diaz and Daubigny. And Reynolds and Gainsborough, who mostly painted very, very beautiful portraits of women, and then Turner, after whom you’ll probably have seen engravings. Several good French painters live here, including Tissot, after whom there are various photos in our Galerie photographique, Otto Weber and Heilbuth. The latter is currently making dazzlingly beautiful paintings in the style of the one by Linder. Be sure, when you get the chance, to write and tell me whether there are photographs after Wauters, besides Hugo van der Goes and Mary of Burgundy, and whether you also know photographs of paintings by Lagye and De Braekeleer. 
       It’s not the elder De Braekeleer I mean but, I believe, a son of his, who had 3 splendid paintings at the last exhibition in Brussels, titled ‘Antwerp’, ‘The school’ and ‘The atlas’. Things are going well for me here. I go walking a lot. Here where I live it’s a quiet, convivial, nice-looking neighbourhood, in this I’ve really been fortunate. And yet I sometimes think back with nostalgia to the wonderful Sundays in Scheveningen10 and so on, but never mind that. You’ll surely have heard that Anna is at home and not well. It’s a bad start to her holiday, but let’s hope she’s better by now. Thanks for what you wrote to me about paintings. Be sure to write and tell me if you ever see anything by Lagye, De Braekeleer, Wauters, Maris, Tissot, George Saal, Jundt, Ziem, Mauve, who are painters I like very much, and by whom you’ll probably 
   see something now and then. Herewith a copy of that poem about that painter ‘who entered The Swan, the inn where he boarded’, which you no doubt remember. It’s Brabant to a T, and I’m so fond of it. Lies copied it out for me on my last evening at home. How much I’d like to have you here, what pleasant days we spent together in The Hague. I still think so often of our walk on Rijswijkseweg, where we drank milk at the mill after the rain. If those paintings we have from you are to be sent back, I’ll send you a portrait of that mill by Weissenbruch. Perhaps you remember, ‘the merry tune’ is his nickname, ‘I say, superrrb’. That Rijswijkseweg holds memories for me which are perhaps the most delightful I have. Perhaps we’ll speak of it again sometime when we meet. And now, old chap, I wish you well, think of me from time to time and write to me soon. It’s so refreshing when I receive a letter. Vincent My regards to Mr Schmidt and Eduard. How are Uncle Hein and Aunt? Write to me about them, do you go there often? Give them my warm regards. 
   The evening hour. Slowly the toll of the angelus-bell resounded o’er the fields, As they blissfully bathed in the gold of the evening sun. O solemn, moving moment! When every mother in the village suddenly Stops the whirring of the wheel to bless herself with the sign of the cross; While in the field the farmer reins in his steaming horses, And, behind the plough, bares his head to murmur an Ave. O solemn, moving moment! When the bell that proclaims far and wide The end of the day’s work makes those powerful, dripping heads Bow down for Him who causes the sweat in the furrow to thrive. For the artist, too, on the slope of yon shady hill, Absorbed in his painting from the earliest morning, The angelus now gave the sign to retreat. Slowly he wiped His brush and palette, which he stowed with his canvas in the valise, Folded his camp-stool and dreamily descended the path That leads, gently winding, through the flowery dale to the village. Yet how oft, before reaching the foot of the hill, did he Stand admiringly still, to imprint on his mind once again The refreshing scene down below, unfolding before his eyes. Just before him lay the village, with a hill to north and to south, Between whose crests the sun, inflamed and sinking in the west, Let flow the whole wealth of its colours and up-conjured glory. The bell, in the grey tower entwined with black-green ivy, Was now silent. Hanging motionless on high were the brown Sails of the windmill; the leaves stood still and above the huts Blue clouds of peat-smoke ascended so straight from the chimneys That they, too, seemed to hang motionless in the shimmering air. ’Twas as though this village, this field, those hills, as though everything, Before wrapping itself in a cloak of evening dew to sleep Beneath the sun’s parting kiss, silently and gratefully Recalled once more the peace and plenty it had again savoured.  Soon, though, this silence was gently disturbed by the sweet sounds Of the evening. In the distance, from a hollow in the hill echoed Lingeringly the sound of the cow-horn, calling the cattle. And at this sign from their herdsman there soon appeared in the furrowed Sandy mountain road the whole of a colourful herd of cows. Cracking and smacking, the lad’s lash drove them forward, While they, as if by turns, their necks outstretched, with friendly lowing Greeted from afar the cow-shed where the milkmaid Waited for them each evening to ease their taut udders. Thus on the paths running out from the village like spokes From an axle, there slowly came movement and life. Here, ’twas a farmer, dragging homeward a harrow or plough On a sledge, whistling a tune and riding beside on his bay; 
   There, a blushing lass, on her head a lock of sweet clover Laced with daisies and poppies, called from afar to the others, Kindly and gaily at once, her clear-toned ‘good evening’. Further... But on the same track where the painter’s path Led, he suddenly heard peals of joyous laughter. Rocking from side to side, a wagon, nearly toppling Under its load of fresh-harvested buckwheat, came rumbling closer, Both horse and burden adorned with fluttering ribbons and greenery. Children, all with wreaths of flowers on their little flaxen heads, Were seated on top, happily waving branches of alder, Or scattering flowers and leaves, which rained down on all sides, While round the wagon a troop of country lads and lasses Skipped and sang enough to startle the whole drowsy plain. Quietly smiling, the Painter, from behind the thicket, Watched as the revellers slowly wound their way down the rutted road. ‘Aye’, he thus mumbled, ‘Aye, the Lord must think it A happy sound, the jubilance with which these hearts So simply pour forth their thanks as they gather the last Fruits, which He yearly lets grow fully ripe from their toil. Yea, for the purest prayer of simplicity and innocence is joy!’ And thus contemplating the calm, deep delight upon which the soul Feasts in the fields; or with his artist’s mind reconstructing In silent rapture the glorious scene of a moment ago, He found he had sauntered, unnoticing, into the village. Already the purple and yellow had faded to grey in the west, And in the east there had risen close by the little church the full Copper-coloured disc of the moon, in mist enshrouded, When he entered The Swan, the inn where he boarded. Jan van Beers (The boarder) London, 13 Sept. 1873 My dear Theo, Writing to Uncle Hein, I’m enclosing a word for you. I’m very curious to hear whether you went to Helvoirt1 on Ma’s birthday and how it was there. Did you get my letter and the lithograph by Weissenbruch that I put in the crate of paintings? Oh, how I’d like to have you here, old chap, to see my new lodgings, which you’ll have heard about. I now have a room, as I’ve long been wishing, without sloping beams and without blue wallpaper with a green border. It’s a very diverting household where I am now, in which they run a school for little boys. Some time ago I spent a Saturday rowing on the Thames with 2 Englishmen. It was glorious.
   Yesterday I saw an exhibition of Belgian paintings, which included various old acquaintances from the last Brussels Exhibition. There were various beautiful things by  A. and Julien de Vriendt, Cluysenaar, Wouters, Coosemans, Gabriël, De Schampheleer, &c. Have you ever seen anything by Terlinden? If you have, be sure to write to me about it. It was truly refreshing to see those Belgian paintings; the English ones13 are, with few exceptions, very disagreeable and feeble. Some time ago I saw one with a sort of fish or dragon no less than 6 ells long. It was ghastly. And a little man who was going to kill the above-mentioned creature. And all this represented, I believe, ‘the archangel Michael slaying Satan’. Adieu, old chap, I wish you well, and write soon. Vincent Another English painting is ‘Satan possessing the herd of swine at the Gadarene lake’. It showed some 50 black pigs and piglets, running helter-skelter downhill and tumbling over each other into the sea. It was very edifying. This was, however, a very clever painting by Prinsep. I just received your letter. That will be quite a change for you, now that you’re going to The Hague. I bet it’ll cost you dearly to say goodbye to beautiful, convivial Brussels. But you’ll get on well in The Hague too. Thanks for writing to me about the paintings. That painting by Millet must have been very rich. Adieu, I’ll write again soon. V. London, 19 Nov. 1873 My dear Theo, I want to make sure that you hear from me soon after arriving in The Hague. I’m longing to hear your first impression of your new position and lodgings. I heard about the beautiful souvenir you got from Mr Schmidt, which just shows that you did very well indeed. I’m glad that we’re both working for the same firm now. Latterly we’ve had quite a few paintings and drawings and sold a lot of them, but we still have a long way to go, it has to become more solid and lasting and substantial. I believe that there’s still a lot 
   to do here in England, but it can’t be done all at once, and of course the first thing we need is to have good paintings &c., and that will be quite a feat. Well, we have to see how it goes and do the best we can with the means at our disposal. How are the nouveautés4 selling in Holland? Here there’s literally almost nothing to be done with the ordinary engravings after Brochart5 &c. The good burin engravings6 sell quite well; among other things we’ve already sold around 20 artist’s proofs of the Venus anadyomene after Ingres. But it’s a delight to see how the photos sell, especially the coloured ones, and they yield a handsome profit. The Musée Goupil & Cie photos we sell only en papillottes, around 100 a day on average. I imagine you’ll like working in the gallery in 
   The Hague, once you’ve got used to it a little. I don’t doubt that your lodgings at the Rooses’ will be to your liking. You should walk a lot if you can find the time. Bid a very good-day from me to all the Rooses. You must write and tell me which painters you like best, both the old and the new, you must be sure to do this, I’m curious to know. You must in any case go to the museum often, it’s good to be acquainted with the old painters, too, and if you get the chance read about art, and especially magazines about art, the Gazette des Beaux-Arts10 &c. When there’s an opportunity I’ll send you a book by Bürger about the museums of The Hague and Amsterdam;11 when you’ve finished it there will be an opportunity to send it back to me. Ask Iterson to write to me if he has a moment, and in particular to send me a list of the painters who 
   were awarded prizes at the Paris exhibition. Is Somerwil13 still with the firm, or has he left now that you’re coming? Things are going all right for me here, I have a nice home, and even though the firm isn’t as exciting as the Hague branch, it’s perhaps good that I’m here, and later on especially, when the trade in paintings becomes a little more important, I’ll possibly be of use. And then, I can’t tell you how interesting it is to see London and the trade and the way of life here, which are so very different from ours. You’ll have had some pleasant days at home;14 how much I’d like to see them all again too. Tell everyone who asks after me that I bid them good-day, especially the Tersteegs, Haanebeeks, Aunt Fie, Van Stockums, and the Rooses, and give Betsy Tersteeg news of me sometime when she comes downstairs. And now, old chap, I wish you well. Write to me soon. Vincent Do you have my room at the Rooses’, or the one you slept in last summer? London, January 1874 My dear Theo, Thanks for writing. I sincerely wish you a very happy New Year. I know that things are going well for you in the office, because I heard as much from Mr Tersteeg. I saw from your letter that you have art in your blood, and that’s a good thing, old chap. I’m glad you like Millet, Jacque, Schreyer, Lambinet, Frans Hals &c., because – as Mauve says2 – ‘that’s it’. Yes, that painting by Millet ‘The evening angelus’, ‘that’s it’. That’s rich, that’s poetry. How I’d like to 
   talk to you about art again, but now we can only write to each other about it often; find things beautiful as much as you can, most people find too little beautiful. I’m writing below a few names of painters whom I like very much indeed. Scheffer, Delaroche, Hébert, Hamon. Leys, Tissot, Lagye, Boughton, Millais, Thijs Maris, Degroux, De Braekeleer Jr. Millet, Jules Breton, Feyen-Perrin, Eugène Feyen, Brion, Jundt, George Saal. Israëls, Anker, Knaus, Vautier, Jourdan, Jalabert, Antigna, Compte-Calix, Rochussen, Meissonier, Zamacois, Madrazo, Ziem, Boudin, Gérôme, Fromentin, De Tournemine, Pasini. 
           Decamps, Bonington, Diaz, T. Rousseau, Troyon, Dupré, Paul Huet, Corot, Schreyer, Jacque, Otto Weber, Daubigny, Wahlberg, Bernier, Emile Breton, Chenu, César de Cock, Mlle Collart. Bodmer, Koekkoek, Schelfhout, Weissenbruch, and last but not least Maris7 and Mauve. But I could go on like this for I don’t know how long, and then come all the old ones, and I’m sure I’ve left out some of the best new ones. Always continue walking a lot and loving nature, for that’s the real way to learn to understand art better and better. Painters understand nature and love it, and teach us to see. And then, there are painters who make nothing but good things, who cannot make anything bad, 
   just as there are ordinary people who cannot do anything that isn’t good. Things are going well for me here, I have a wonderful home and it’s a great pleasure for me to observe London and the English way of life and the English themselves, and I also have nature and art and poetry, and if that isn’t enough, what is? Yet I haven’t forgotten Holland, and especially The Hague and Brabant. We’re busy in the office, we’re occupied with the inventory, which is however drawn up in 5 days, so we have it a little easier than you do in The Hague. I hope you had a nice Christmas, just as I did. Well, old chap, I wish you well and write to me soon; in this letter I’ve written just what popped into my pen, I hope you’ll be able to understand it. Adieu, regards to everyone in the office and anyone else who asks after me, particularly everyone at Aunt Fie’s10 and the Haanebeeks’. Vincent Herewith a few words for Mr Roos. London, 20 February 1874 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter. I don’t need the book yet, but send it back anyway when you’ve had time to read it. I haven’t read the book by Van Vloten, but I’d like to have it sometime. I’ve read another book on art by V. Vl. and didn’t agree with him completely, and it was really quite scholarly. Bürger is simpler, and everything he says is true. I’m glad you went to Amsterdam;4 thank Uncle Cor when you see him for the brochure he sent me. I’m glad you’re so happy at the Rooses’; as I already asked Anna Carbentus to tell you, you’re completely right about pulling the carrot. I also agree with you about B.H., but beware of your heart, old chap. Have you seen Mr Jacobson’s collection8 yet? It’s well worth while, he’ll no doubt ask you to come and see it sometime. Give him my regards, as politely as you can, and tell him that I’m doing well here and am seeing a lot of beautiful things. 
   I’m all right, I’m busy. Thank Willem10 for his letter and give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and Iterson, Jan and Piet, and anyone who asks after me. I wish you well. Vincent London, 30 March 1874 My dear Theo, In a letter from Pa and Ma I got a guilder from you to buy a pair of cuff links. Many thanks, old chap, but you shouldn’t have done it, you need your money more than I do. Thanks for your letter of this morning. I was very glad to hear that Mauve is engaged to Jet C. That’s wonderful. I’m glad that you’re so well. It’s good that you’ve read the book by Bürger;3 read about art as much as possible, especially the Gazette des Beaux-Arts &c. 
   Above all, be sure to find out as much as possible about paintings. The Apol that we have here now is very beautiful, last year he painted a similar subject and I found it better and fresher than this one. I’m glad that you go to Uncle Cor’s occasionally. You see things there that you never find at the gallery in The Hague. I’m also busy at present and am glad of it, because that’s what I need. Adieu, old chap, keep your chin up, and I wish you well. Give my regards to Van Iterson. Vincent As regards Anna, I haven’t heard anything more. London, 30 April 1874 My dear Theo, Many happy returns of the day. Do right and don’t look back, and things will turn out well. I was glad to get your last letter. I sent you a photo a couple of days ago: Young girl with a sword, Jacquet3 because I thought you’d like to have it. Van Gorkom’s painting isn’t very dirty. (Between you and me, I didn’t see it, but anyway tell him I wrote that it wasn’t very dirty.) How are Mauve and Jet Carbentus? Write to me with news of them. It’s good that you visit 
   the Haanebeeks. If I come to Holland, I’ll also come to The Hague for a day or two if possible, because The Hague is like a second home to me. (I’ll come and stay with you.) I’d have liked to go on that walk to De Vink. I walk here as much as I can, but I’m very busy. It’s absolutely beautiful here (even though it’s in the city). There are lilacs and hawthorns and laburnums &c. blossoming in all the gardens, and the chestnut trees are magnificent. If one truly loves nature one finds beauty everywhere. Yet I sometimes yearn so much for Holland, and especially Helvoirt. I’m doing a lot of gardening and have sown sweet peas, poppies and reseda, now we just have to 
   wait and see what comes of it. I enjoy the walk from home to the office and in the evening from the office back home. It takes about three-quarters of an hour. It’s wonderful to be finished so early here; we close at 6 o’clock and yet we work none the less because of it. Give my regards to everyone I know at the Tersteegs’, Haanebeeks’ and Carbentuses’, and especially the Rooses’, also everyone at Uncle Pompe’s, because they’re going to Kampen, and Mr Bakhuyzen9 &c. I wish you the best. Vincent The apple trees &c. have blossomed beautifully here; it seems to me that everything is earlier here than in Holland. 
   As soon as I know something more definite about my going home, I’ll write to you directly. I fear, however, that it will be around 4 weeks or so before it can happen. Write soon. London, 16 June 1874 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter. I think I’ll be leaving here on Thursday, 25 or Saturday, 27 June, if nothing unforeseen happens. I’m longing so much to see everyone and Holland. I’m also looking forward to having a good talk with you about art, start thinking about any questions you might want to put to me. We have many beautiful things here, including a spirited painting by Jacquet, and a beautiful Boldini.
   There are beautiful things at the Royal Academy this year; among others Tissot has 3 paintings. I’ve been drawing again recently, but it was nothing special. I was glad to see in your letter that you visit the Haanebeeks. Adieu, goodbye for now, give my regards to all my friends. Ever, Your brother. Vincent. I’m glad you like César de Cock so much; he’s one of the few painters to have understood our Brabant intimately enough. I don’t know whether I told you that I met him last year in Paris. Helvoirt, 10 July 1874 My dear Theo, Thanks for the information you got. We’re now staying a day longer and will arrive in London on Wednesday morning. I gave you the photo in the Forbes catalogue1 here already, because I thought it would interest you, being the Scheldt and therefore Belgium. It’s of a painting by Cap. It’s not so very beautiful, but at least it’s original. I’ll write to you soon from London. I wish you well. Vincent. London, 21 July 1874. My dear Theo, Yesterday a crate was sent to The Hague in which I put a photo of a J. Maris and also ‘The landlady’s daughter’ I promised, both of which I hope you’ll hang up in your room. There’s a photo in the same crate of a Thijs Maris for Mr Tersteeg. Schüller at Paris3 sent me 6 copies of both, which I needed in order to give away. I can’t spare another of the Thijs Maris. Anna and I arrived in London safe and sound, and will manage here somehow. 
   I’m not saying that we’ll find something quickly, but each day that she’s here she learns something, and in any case I believe there’s more chance of her finding something here than in Holland. It’s wonderful for me to walk with her through the streets in the evening; I then find everything here just as beautiful as I did when I first arrived. I wish you well, old chap, and give my regards to the Rooses, Haanebeeks and Carbentuses5 if you see any of them. I’m learning to swim. Write to me whether you’ve begun reading Michelet6 and what you think of it. That book was a revelation to me. Adieu, Vincent Regards from Anna. London, 31 July 1874 My dear Theo, I’m glad you’ve been reading Michelet and that you really understand it. A book like that at least teaches one to see that there’s a lot more to love than people usually think. That book was a revelation and immediately a gospel to me. ‘There is no such thing as an old woman!’2 (This isn’t to say that there are no old women, but that a woman doesn’t grow old as long as she loves and is loved.) And then a chapter like The longing for autumn, how rich it is. 
   That a woman is ‘a completely different being’ from a man, and a being that we do not yet know, or at least only very superficially, as you say, yes, that I certainly believe. And that a woman and a man can become one, that is, one whole and not two halves, that I believe too. Anna is managing well, we go on wonderful walks together. It’s so beautiful here, if only one has a good and a single eye, without many beams in it. But if one has that, then it’s beautiful everywhere. Pa isn’t at all better, even though he and Ma say he is. Yesterday we received a letter with all kinds of plans (whether we shouldn’t try this and that), which would be unfeasible and certainly useless, and at the end Pa said yet again that he’d leave it all to us7 &c. &c. Rather feeble and disagreeable, Theo, and it reminded me so much of Grandfather’s8 letters, but what can be done about it? Our dear aunts9 are staying 
   there now, and are certainly doing a lot of good! Things are as they are, and what is a body to do about it, as Young Jochem said. Anna and I look at the newspaper faithfully every day and answer the advertisements if there are any. Moreover, we’ve already registered with a Governess agency. So we’re doing what we can. More haste, less speed. It’s good that you go to the Haanebeeks so often; give everyone there my warm regards and give them some news of me. That painting by Thijs Maris that Mr Tersteeg bought11 must be beautiful, I’ve already heard about it, and I myself have already bought and sold one completely in the same genre. My passion for drawing has again vanished here in England, but maybe inspiration will strike again one day. 
   I’m reading a lot again. We’ll probably be moving on 1 January 1875 to another, larger gallery. Mr Obach is in Paris at the moment, deciding whether or not we’ll take over that gallery. Don’t mention this to anyone for the time being. I wish you well; write to us again soon. Anna takes quite some pleasure in paintings, and has rather a good eye. She already finds Boughton, Maris and Jacquet beautiful, for example, so that’s a start. Between you and me, I think we’ll have trouble finding something for her, everywhere they say she’s too young and they require German as well, but at any rate she certainly has more of a chance here than in Holland. Adieu Vincent You can imagine how wonderful it is for me to be here with Anna. Tell Mr T. that the paintings arrived in good order15 and that I’ll write to him soon. London, 10 Aug. 1874 My dear Theo, ‘Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man.’1 ‘He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.’2 So stick to your own ideas, and if you doubt the goodness of them, test them against those of him who dared to say ‘I am the truth’, or against those of some humane person, such as Michelet. Purity of soul and impurity of body can go together. You know the Margaret at the fountain by Ary Scheffer;5 is there a purer being than that girl ‘who loved so much’? ‘Leys is not an imitator, but a kindred spirit’ is a true saying that touched me as well. One could say the same of some of Tissot’s paintings, of his Walk in the snow, Walk 
   on the ramparts, Margaret in church, &c. What is the subject of Fagel’s Leys? Buy Alphonse Karr’s ‘Voyage autour de mon jardin’ with the money I gave you. Be sure to do it, I want you to read it. Anna and I take a walk every evening; it’s already the beginning of autumn, and that makes nature even more serious and intimate. We’re going to move and will live in a house completely overgrown with ivy;11 we’ll write to you again soon from there.  Regards to everyone who asks after me. Vincent  My dear Theo, I’ve filled your little book1 and I believe it’s turned out well. Send me The cliff by Jules Breton when you get the chance. Our gallery is now finished and it’s beautiful3, we have many beautiful things at the moment: Jules Dupré, Michel, Daubigny, Maris, Israëls, Mauve, Bisschop, &c. We’re going to hold an exhibition in April. Mr Boussod6 has promised to send us the best that can be had: Malaria by Hébert, The cliff by J. Breton, &c. I’d like so much to have you here, we must make sure that it happens sometime. I’d like so much to show you my room &c. There’s a beautiful exhibition of old art here, including a large Descent from the Cross by Rembrandt, 5 large figures at twilight, you can imagine the sentiment. 5 Ruisdaels, 1 Frans Hals, Van Dyck. A landscape with figures by Rubens, a landscape, an autumn evening, by Titian. 2 portraits by Tintoretto16 and beautiful old English art, Reynolds, Romney and Old Crome, landscape, magnificent. Adieu, I’ll send your little book at the first opportunity. Write to me soon. Vincent  6 March 1875 My dear Theo, Bravo Theo – You well understood that girl in Adam Bede. That landscape – in which a dull yellow sandy road leads over the hill to the village, with mud or whitewashed huts with green, moss-covered roofs and here and there a blackthorn, on either side brown heather and bunt and a grey sky, with a narrow white strip above the horizon – is by Michel. Except that the atmosphere is purer and nobler than in Michel. Today I’m enclosing that little book3 for you in the crate to be sent. Also Jesus by Renan4 and Jeanne d’Arc by Michelet, and also a portrait of 
  Corot, from the London News, which I also have hanging in my room. I don’t believe there’s any chance that you’ll be transferred to the London branch for the time being. Don’t feel bad because you’re not finding things difficult; I have it easy, too. I believe that life is quite long, and the time when ‘another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not’7 will come of its own accord. Adieu, give my regards to everyone I know. With a handshake, Vincent  6 April 1875 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter. Didn’t I copy out Meeresstille by Heine in your little book? Some time ago I saw a painting by Thijs Maris2 that reminded me of it. An old Dutch town with rows of brownish red houses with step-gables and tall flights of steps, grey roofs, and white or yellow doors, window-frames and cornices; canals with ships and a large white drawbridge, a barge with a man at the tiller going under it. The little house of the bridge-keeper, whom one sees through the window, sitting in his office. Some distance away a stone bridge over the canal, with people and a cart with white horses crossing it. And everywhere movement, a porter with 
   his wheelbarrow, a man leaning against the railing, gazing into the water, women in black with white caps. The foreground a quay with paving-stones and a black railing. In the distance a tower rises above the houses. A greyish white sky over everything. It’s a small painting, upright. The subject is nearly the same as the large J. Maris, Amsterdam, which you perhaps know, only this is talent and the other is genius. I’ve again copied out one or two things for you, which I’ll send when I get the chance. Think of ‘The cliff’5 and whether you know of anything else. That Victor Hugo piece is beautiful. Adieu, give my regards to Pa if you see him. Vincent  London, April 1875 My dear Theo, I’m sending you herewith a small drawing. I made it last Sunday, the morning a daughter (13 years old) of my landlady died. It’s a view of Streatham Common, a large, grass-covered area with oak trees and broom. It had rained in the night, and the ground was soggy here and there and the young spring grass fresh and green. As you see, it’s scribbled on the title page of the ‘Poesies d’Edmond Roche’. There are beautiful ones among them, serious and 
   sad, including one that begins and ends Sad and alone, I climbed the sad, bare dune, Where the sea keens its ceaseless moaning plaint, The dune where dies the wide unfurling wave, Drab path that winds and winds upon itself again. and another, ‘Calais’ How I love to see you once again, o my native town, Dear sea nymph seated at the waters’ edge! I love the soaring spire of your bell-tower, Lovely in its boldness and its elegance, Its fretted cupola, through which we see the sky. You’ll probably be curious about what goes with the etching by Corot6 and so I’ve copied that out as well.  The pond to Corot We watched the pond, its water leaden, drear, Form crease upon crease slowly in the breeze, And the mud, enfolding in a softened line The prow and black sides of a boat aground;  The woods’ high crown, leaf by fallen leaf, Lay strewn upon the ground; the sky was filled with mist; We two, in whispers, almost furtively,  Were sadly saying, ‘Summer’s past: These slopes have lost their accustomed grace; No more green foliage, no more golden light Trembling in the trembling water or touching tops with gold!’ This idyll may yet come before our eyes again, If you would have it so: are you not the master Who re-created it after its first creator’s hand? Ville-d’Avray7 
   Warm regards, and I wish you the best. Adieu Vincent  London, 8 May 1875 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter. How is the patient? I’d already heard from Pa that she was ill, but I didn’t know that it was as bad as you said. Write to me about this soon, if you will. Yes, old boy, ‘what shall we say?’3 C.M. and Mr Tersteeg were here and left again last Saturday. In my opinion they went a little too often to the Crystal Palace and other places that didn’t concern them. It seems to me they could also have come and seen where I lived. You ask about Anna, but we’ll discuss that another time.
   I hope and believe that I’m not what many think me to be at present, we’ll see, we have to give it time; people will probably say the same about you in a couple of years; at least if you continue to be what you are: my brother in two senses of the word. Regards, and my regards to the patient. With a handshake, Vincent 
   To act on the world one must die to oneself. The people that makes itself the missionary of a religious thought has no other country henceforth than that thought. Man is not placed on the earth merely to be happy; nor is he placed here merely to be honest, he is here to accomplish great things through society, to arrive at nobleness, and to outgrow the vulgarity in which the existence of almost all individuals drags on. Renan6  Paris, 19 June 1875 My dear Theo, I had hoped to see her again before she died, and that didn’t happen. Man proposes and God disposes. In the first crate we send to Holland you’ll find a photo of that painting by P. de Champaigne, of which Michelet said, ‘she stayed with me for 30 years, coming back to me incessantly’, also an etching by Daubigny after Ruisdael’s ‘Bush’, a lithograph after Corot’s ‘Sunset’, a lithograph by Bodmer, ‘Fontainebleau in the autumn’7 and two Jacque etchings. Adieu Vincent I don’t know how long I’ll be staying here, but before I return to London I hope to go to Helvoirt. I hope you’ll be there too. I’ll pay for the journey. 
   You certainly won’t forget her and her death, but keep it to yourself. This is one of those things that, little by little, makes us ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’;10 and that we must become.  Paris, 29 June 1875 My dear Theo, I’d rather that you were out of The Hague. Don’t you sometimes long for that as well? Write and tell me, yes or no? I’m staying here for the time being, and will probably not go to Holland before the autumn. In the first crate going to The Hague you’ll find a package for Helvoirt. Please send it on after looking at what’s inside. There are a few lithographs &c. which I’d like to see in Pa’s study with the ‘Funeral in the cornfield’ by Van der Maaten. Anker’s painting of ‘An old Huguenot’, a photo of which is in the package in question, I sold to Uncle Vincent, who was here a couple of days ago. He also bought 
   a beautiful painting by Jacque, horses pulling a plough in the rain. There was a sale here of drawings by Millet, I don’t know whether I’ve already written to you about it. When I entered the room in Hôtel Drouot where they were exhibited, I felt something akin to: Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. You know that Millet lived in Gréville. Well, I don’t know whether it was Gréville or Granville where the man I once told you about died. At any rate, I looked at Millet’s drawings of ‘The cliffs at Gréville’ with redoubled attention. A painting of his, ‘The church of Gréville’, is now in the Luxembourg. Adieu Vincent   Paris, 6 July 1875 My dear Theo, Thanks for writing, yes, old boy, I thought so. You must write and tell me sometime how your English is, have you done anything about it? If not, it’s not such a great disaster. I’ve rented a small room in Montmartre which you’d like; it’s small, but overlooks a little garden full of ivy and Virginia creeper. I want to tell you which prints I have on the wall. 

Ruisdael 
 
The bush2


ditto
 
Bleaching fields3


Rembrandt
 
Reading the Bible (a large, old Dutch room, (in the evening, a candle on the table) in which a young mother sits beside her child’s cradle reading the Bible; an old woman listens, it’s something that recalls: Verily I say unto you, ‘for where 2 or 3 are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them’, it’s an old copper engraving, as large as ‘The bush’, superb).


P. de Champaigne
 
Portrait of a lady7 

 ﻿  

Corot 
 
Evening8


ditto
 
ditto9


Bodmer
 
Fontainebleau10


Bonington
 
A road11


Troyon
 
Morning12


Jules Dupré
 
Evening (resting place)13


Maris
 
Washerwoman14


ditto
 
A baptism15


Millet
 
The four times of the day


 
 
(woodcuts, 4 prints)16


Van der Maaten
 
Funeral in the cornfield17


Daubigny
 
Dawn (cock crowing)18


Charlet
 
Hospitality. Farmhouse surrounded by fir trees, winter scene with snow. A peasant and a soldier before a door.


Ed. Frère
 
Seamstresses20


ditto
 
A cooper21

 Well, old boy, keep well, you know it, longsuffering and meek, as much as possible. Let us remain good friends. Adieu Vincent  Paris, 15 July 1875 My dear Theo, Uncle Vincent was here again, we were together quite a lot and talked about one thing and another. I asked him whether he thought there would be an opportunity to get you here, into the Paris branch. At first he wouldn’t hear of it, and said it was much better that you stay in The Hague; but I kept insisting, and you can be sure that he’ll bear it in mind. When he comes to The Hague he’ll probably talk to you; stay calm and let him have his say; it won’t do you any harm, and later on you’ll probably need him now and again. You shouldn’t talk about me if it’s not the right moment. He’s terribly clever, when I was here last winter1 one of the things he said to me was ‘perhaps I know nothing of supernatural things, but of natural things I know everything’. I’m not sure whether those were his exact words, but that was the gist of it. 
   I also want to tell you that one of his favourite paintings is ‘Lost illusions’ by Gleyre. Sainte-Beuve said, ‘There is in most men a poet who died young, whom the man survived’3 and Musset, ‘know that in us there is often a sleeping poet, ever young and alive’. I believe that the former is true of Uncle Vincent. So you know who it is you’re dealing with, and so be warned. Don’t hesitate to ask him openly to have you sent here or to London. I thank you for your letter of this morning, and for the verse by Rückert. Do you have his poems? I’d like to know more of them. When there’s an opportunity I’ll send you a French Bible and L’imitation de Jesus Christ. This was probably the favourite book of that woman whom P. de Champaigne painted;6 in the Louvre there’s a portrait, also by P. de C., of her daughter, a nun; she has L’imitation lying on a chair next to her. Pa once wrote to me: ‘you know that the same lips that uttered “be harmless as doves” also immediately added “and wise as serpents”’. You should bear 
   that in mind as well, and believe me to be ever Your loving brother Vincent Do you have the photos of the Meissoniers in the gallery? Look at them often; he painted men. You may well know The smoker at the window and The young man having lunch.  Paris, 24 July 1875 My dear Theo, A couple of days ago we got a painting by De Nittis, a view of London on a rainy day, Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament. I crossed Westminster Bridge every morning and evening and know what it looks like when the sun’s setting behind Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament, and what it’s like early in the morning, and in the winter with snow and fog. When I saw this painting I felt how much I love London. Yet I believe it’s good for me to be away from it. This in answer to your question. I certainly don’t think that you’ll be going to London. 
   Thanks for ‘Aus der Jugendzeit’ and ‘Um Mitternacht’ by Rückert. It’s poignantly beautiful; the latter made me think of ‘La nuit de Décembre’ by Musset. I wish I could send it to you, but don’t have it. Yesterday we sent a crate to The Hague, what I had promised you was in it. I hear that Anna and Lies are at home; I’d like to see them again. I wish you the very best, and write again soon. With a handshake Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 13 August 1875 My dear Theo, I had wanted to write to you earlier. I’m glad that Pa has accepted the call to Etten;1 under the circumstances I also think it good that Willemien is going along with Anna. I’d also have liked to be with all of you that Sunday at Helvoirt;3 have I already told you that I was with Soek and his family at Ville-d’Avray that day? I was surprised to find 3 paintings by Corot in the church there. On Sunday last and Sunday a fortnight ago6 I went to Mr Mercier’s7 church and heard him speak on ‘all things work together for good to them that love God’8 (in Dutch it says ‘for those who love God all things will work together for good’) and on ‘He created man in his own image’, it was glorious and grand. You should also go to church every Sunday if you can, even if it isn’t so very beautiful; 
   do that, you won’t regret it. Have you ever been to hear the Rev. Zubli? In the list of what I have hanging in my room I forgot: 

N. Maes 
 
The nativity11 


Hamon
 
‘If I were sombre winter’12


Ed. Frère
 
The seamstresses13


ditto 
 
A cooper14


Français
 
Last fine day15


Ruipérez
 
The imitation of Jesus Christ16


Bosboom
 
Cantabimus and psallemus17 


 I’m doing my best to find another engraving of ‘Rembrandt, Reading the Bible’18 for you, perhaps I’ll be sending it to you in the first crate of paintings. Have I sent you a lithograph of Troyon, Morning effect? Français, Last fine days? If not, write and tell me; I have two of each. And now, I wish you well, do right and don’t look back, as much as you can, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Please give my regards to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg and Mauve, also my regards to the Van Stockums, Haanebeeks, Aunt Fie, Rooses, &c. What do you think about our Anna?  My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter and for the poem by Rückert. On Sunday I went again to Mr Bersier, his sermon was based on the text ‘It is not lawful for thee’, he concluded with ‘Happy are they for whom life has all its thorns’. Here are some words which I know Uncle Vincent is very fond of: ‘Rejoice, young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgement. Remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, 
   when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.’3 Yet I find even more beautiful: ‘Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.’4 And ‘Thy will be done’5 and ‘Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil’. Herewith a note for Mr Tersteeg, asking him if he would frame 2 engravings, ‘Good Friday’7 and ‘St Augustine’, which you’ll find in the next crate. And will you please be so kind as to send them to Helvoirt around 10 Sept. I’d really like them to be from both of us, so that you pay 2. guilders towards the frames. I told Mr Tersteeg that you’d write and tell me what they cost and then I’d send him the money. You can give me the 2. guilders when we see each other. That probably won’t be before Christmas; I believe it’s better not to ask for any time off before then. This evening I’m going to dine with Mr Hamman. Adieu, write again soon, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 2 Sept. 1875 My dear Theo, This morning I heard from Pa and from you the news of Uncle Jan’s death. Such things make us say, ‘O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our love for Thee make that bond ever stronger’2 and ‘Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man’. In the first crate of paintings going to Holland you’ll find a few lithographs and that engraving after Rembrandt. The two lithographs after Bonington will no doubt be to your liking. At the same time I’m sending a couple of photos for Pa of pictures by Jules Breton and Corot; I’ll write ‘for Helvoirt’ on the back. I’ve never heard of the painter Pynas you write about; I’m eager to see the painting in question. Nor do I know that lithograph after Diaz, ‘A monk’.
   Last Sunday I was in the Louvre (on Sunday I often go either there or to the Luxembourg); I wish you could see the Van Ostade, his own family, himself, his wife and, I believe, 8 children, all in black, the wife and girls with white caps and neckerchiefs in a stately old Dutch room with a large fireplace, oak wainscoting and ceiling and whitewashed walls with paintings in black frames. In the corner of the room a large bed with blue curtains and blanket. Rembrandt’s ‘Supper at Emmaus’, of which I wrote, has been engraved, Messrs G&Co. will publish the engraving in the autumn. Do you ever visit Borchers? It seems to me that his mother is a distinguished lady. Go out often, if you can, I mean of course to visit Caroline van Stockum, the Carbentuses, Haanebeeks, Borchers &c.; not to Kraft’s11 or Marda’s, you understand! Or it would have to be because you couldn’t do otherwise, just once or twice can do no harm. How are things at the gallery? I know all about how it can be sometimes, but anyway, do whatever your hand finds to do. And I wish you the very best, and write again soon. Ever, Your loving brother Vincent Herewith a note for Borchers. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to all who ask after me. B. tells me that Weehuizen died, I didn’t know, were you there? Paris, 4 Sept. 75 My dear Theo, I’m sending you herewith my letter for Ma’s birthday, please enclose it with yours. I’ve bought a book about Michel, with etchings after his paintings;2 I’ll send it to you as soon as I’ve finished it. Michel, though, isn’t nearly so beautiful as that landscape described in that passage in Adam Bede, which we both found so moving. Bonington, 
       too, almost painted it, and yet that isn’t it either. When you’ve finished the book I’d like to ask you to give it in my name to Uncle Cor to read, when you have the opportunity of course, though I’m giving it to you. I see the paintings themselves, so naturally you can have the description and etchings after them. My regards to the Haanebeeks, Carbentuses, Van Stockums, Mauve, Rooses &c. if the occasion presents itself. I wish you the very best. Ever Your loving brother Vincent Give the book on Michel to Mr Tersteeg to read, too. My dear Theo, You hadn’t expected to get this letter back again, had you? No, old boy, this isn’t the path to follow. The death of Weehuizen is certainly sad, but sad in a different way than you say. Keep your eyes open and try to become strong and resolute. Was that book by Michelet2 really meant for him? Actually, I’d like to suggest something to you, Theo, which will perhaps amaze you: Read no more Michelet or any other book (except the Bible) until we’ve seen each other again at Christmas, and do what I told you, go often in the evenings to the Van Stockums, Borchers &c. I believe you won’t regret it, you’ll feel much freer as soon as you’ve started this regimen. Be careful with the words I underlined in your letter. There is quiet melancholy, certainly, thank God, but I don’t know if we’re allowed to feel it yet, you see I say we, I no more than you. Pa wrote to me recently ‘Melancholy does not hurt, but makes us see things with a holier eye’. That is true ‘quiet melancholy’, fine gold, but we aren’t that far yet, not by a long way. Let us hope and pray that we may come so far and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent I’m already a little bit further than you and already see, alas, that the expression ‘childhood and youth are vanity’5 are almost completely true. So remain steadfast, old chap; I heartily shake your hand. Paris. 12 Sept. 1875. My dear Theo, Wings, wings above life! Wings over the grave and death!1 That’s what we need, and I’m beginning to see that we can acquire them. Doesn’t Pa have them, for instance? And you know how he got them, through prayer and the fruits thereof: patience and faith, and through the Bible, which was a light unto his path and a lamp unto his feet. This afternoon I heard a beautiful sermon on ‘forget that which is behind you’;4 part of which was: ‘Have more hope than remembrances; what there was of seriousness and blessings in your past life is not lost; do not reflect on it any longer, you will find it elsewhere, but keep moving forward. All things are become new in Jesus Christ’. Keep your chin up, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent If it’s indeed true that childhood and youth are vanity6 (always bearing in mind what’s written above, and remembering that although one has to start anew later, a well-spent youth is worth a fortune), shouldn’t it then be our ambition and hope to become men like Pa and others? Let us both hope and pray for this. My regards to everyone who asks after me. You know the etching by Rembrandt, Burgomaster Six standing in front of the window, reading. I know that Uncle Vincent and Cor like it very much, and I sometimes think that they must have looked like that when they were younger. You also know the portrait of Six when he was older, I believe there’s an engraving of it in your shop. That life of his must have been a fine and serious life.  Paris, 13 Sept. 1875. My dear Theo, The photographs of the J. Breton and the Corot are for Helvoirt;1 the rest are for you. Send on the Helvoirt ones when you have the opportunity, but I’ll do my best to get another copy of the Rembrandt, so perhaps it would be better to delay sending them until I’ve sent you that one as well. You’ll have received my letter of yesterday by now. Warm regards, Vt. Paris, 17 Sept. 1875. My dear Theo, Feeling, even a fine feeling, for the beauties of nature isn’t the same as religious feeling, although I believe that the two are closely connected. The same is true of a feeling for art. Don’t give in to that too much either. Hold fast especially to your love for the firm and for your work and to respect for Mr Tersteeg. Later on you’ll see, better than now, that he deserves it. You don’t have to take it to extremes, though. Nearly everyone has a feeling for nature, some more than others, but there are few who feel that God is a spirit, and they that worship Him must worship him in spirit and in truth. Pa is one of the few, Ma too, and also Uncle Vincent, I believe. You know that it is written ‘The world passeth away and all its glory’, and that on the other hand there are also the words ‘that part which shall not be taken away’, about ‘a well of living water springing up into everlasting life’. Let us also pray that we may become rich in God. But don’t think too deeply about these things, which will become clearer to you of themselves with time 
  , and just do what I’ve advised you to do. Let us ask for our part in life that we may become the poor in the kingdom of God, God’s servants. We haven’t achieved this yet, however, for often there are beams in our eye9 of which we ourselves are unaware; let us ask that our eye may become single, for then we shall be completely single. My regards to the Rooses and if anyone should ask after me, and believe me ever, Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 25 Sept. 1875 My dear Theo, The way is narrow, so we must be careful. You know how others have arrived where we wish to go; let us take that simple path as well. ora et labora. Let us do our daily work, whatever the hand finds to do, with all our might, and let us believe that God will give good gifts, a part that shall not be taken away, to those who pray to Him for it. And let us trust in God with all our heart and lean not unto our own understanding. God’s will and not ours. ‘Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new’. II Cor. 5:18. I’m going to get rid of all my books by Michelet &c. &c., you should too. How I’m longing for Christmas, but let’s be patient, that time will come soon enough. Keep well, old chap, and give my regards to all my acquaintances, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent 
   I’ll send the money for the frames9 as soon as possible; when I write to Mr Tersteeg I’ll tell him that I don’t have much money at the moment, because I’ve asked our cashier to keep back part of my monthly wages as I’ll be needing a good deal of money around Christmas for my trip &c. I hope, though, that it won’t be so very long before I can send it. If I were you I wouldn’t go to Borchers all that often. Don’t you find these words beautiful? I Cor 2:4 and 510 For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. And my speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.  Paris, 27 Sept. 1875. My dear Theo, ‘The kingdom of God cometh not with observation: the kingdom of God is within you.’1 ‘The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister’, and we who want to become His disciples, Christians, we are no better than our Master. Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the pure in heart. Narrow is the way, which leadeth unto Life, and few there be that find it. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. My brother, let us take care; let us ask Him who is above, who also maketh intercession for us,
   that He should not take us out of the world, but that He should keep us from the evil. Yea, let us watch and be sober, let us trust in the Lord with all our heart, and lean not unto our own understanding. Let us ask that He compel us to come in, that He give us a Christian life to fulfil; that He teach us to deny ourselves, daily to take up our cross and to follow Him;13 to be meek, longsuffering, and lowly in heart. A part which shall not be taken away, a well of living water17 springing up into everlasting life, these are the good gifts that He who heareth prayer, the Giver of all perfect gifts, will give to those who pray to Him for them. And in addition to all this, the assurance that there is ‘a house of the Father in which there are many mansions, and that when He has prepared a place for us there22 He will draw all men unto Him. And to comfort us in this life, on our way to our Father’s house, ‘the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, who will guide us into all truth’.
   The Christian life nevertheless has its dark side too; it is mainly men’s work. Those who walk with God, God’s friends, God’s pious followers, those who worship Him in Spirit and in Truth, have been proved and tried, and have oft-times received from God a thorn in the flesh;29 blessed will we be when we can repeat after our father, Paul: when I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child: but now that I have become a man, I put away childish things, and I became, and God made me: sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. Write to me soon, and give my regards to all my acquaintances, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent. Paris, 29 Sept. 1875 My dear Theo, Be careful, old boy, don’t lose your resilience. See things as they are, and, for yourself, don’t think everything good. One can deviate, both to the left hand and to the right hand. Remember what Pa no doubt once told you too: understanding and feeling must go together. Warm regards and ever, Your loving brother Vincent Write again soon. I advised you to go out quite a lot, but if you don’t like it, don’t do it. You know that I didn’t go out so very much either, and that people often remarked upon it. How much I’d like for us to be able to breakfast together or drink a cup of chocolate in my room. Keep well, old chap. Don’t take things that don’t concern you directly too much to heart, and don’t let them weigh upon you too heavily. How is it going, eating bread? Have you tried it yet? In haste, I shake your hand heartily in thought.  Paris, 6 Oct. 1875 My dear Theo, Even though I wrote to you only recently, I want to do so again anyway, because I know how difficult life can sometimes be. Keep your chin up, old boy, after rain comes sunshine, just keep hoping for that. Rain and sunshine alternate on ‘the road that goes uphill all the way, yes to the very end’, and from time to time one also rests on ‘the journey that takes the whole day long, from morn till night’. So think now and often after this, that ‘this also will pass away’. And especially, you too should ask: Create in me a new heart, O God; 
   and renew a right spirit within me. Today I had the opportunity to send a package to Anna and Willemien. Among other things I sent her L’imitation de Jesus Christ4 and several books of the Bible, published separately, in the same edition as the Psalms I sent you. Read them faithfully. Would you perhaps like the 4 Gospels and some of the epistles, printed separately? I also sent Anna several prints – including Rembrandt, Reading the Bible and The supper at Emmaus (an old engraving, by De Frey, I believe), Philippe de Champaigne, Portrait of a lady, a large, beautiful etching after Chaigneau, Shepherdess and sheep, and then Dupré, Evening, Troyon, Morning, Bodmer, Fontainebleau, Français, Last fine days, Frère, Seamstresses, and A cooper, Daubigny, After sunset, &c. &c., as well as a couple of photos, namely of Delaroche, Gethsemane No. 424, Good Friday and Mater Dolorosa14 and Brion, The farewells. I hope so much that things will continue to go well for Anna there. She keeps up her courage, I know so well that she sometimes finds things so difficult. And yet ‘one has one’s good days’ as Jules Dupré often said, let’s go on believing that. 
   I’d very much like to have the Dutch hymns. When you get the opportunity, do you think you could manage to send the cheapest edition that can be found? I have the Psalms. There are also some beautiful English hymns,b including this one: Thy way not mine, o Lord However dark it be, Lead me by thine own hand Choose out the path for me. I dare not choose my lot; I would not if I might; Choose Thou for me, my God, So shall I walk aright. The kingdom that I seek, Is thine; so let the way That leads to it be thine Else I must surely stray. Choose Thou for me my friend My sickness, or my health; Choose Thou my cares for me, My poverty my wealth. Not mine, not mine, the choice In things or great or small Be Thou my Guide my strength My wisdom and my all. and the following: Nearer my God to Thee Nearer to Thee! E’en though it be a cross That raiseth me; Still all my song shall be Nearer my God to Thee Nearer to Thee. 
   Though like a wanderer, The sun gone down, Darkness come over me My rest a stone; Yet in my dreams I’d be Nearer, my God, to Thee Nearer to Thee! There let my way appear Steps unto Heaven; All that Thou sendest me In mercy given Angels to beckon me Nearer, my God, to Thee Nearer to Thee. Oft in sorrow and in woe Onward, Christians, onward go; Fight the fight, maintain the strife, Strengthen’d with the bread of life. Let your drooping hearts be glad; March in heavenly armour clad: Fight, nor think the battle long, Soon shall vict’ry tune your song Let not sorrow dim your eye, Soon shall ev’ry tear be dry; Let not fear your course impede, Great your strength, if great your need!19 Give my regards to my acquaintances. How is Caroline van Stockum? Give my special regards to her, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent Does the road go uphill then all the way? ‘Yes to the very end’. And will the journey take all day long? ‘From morn till night, my friend’.  Paris, 11 October 1875 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of this morning. This time I’d like to write to you as I seldom do; I’d actually like to tell you in detail about my life here. As you know, I live in Montmartre. Also living here is a young Englishman, an employee of the firm, 18 years old, the son of an art dealer in London, who will probably enter his father’s firm later on. He had never been away from home and was tremendously boorish, especially the first few weeks he was here; he ate, for example, mornings, afternoons and evenings 4-6 sous2 worth of bread (bread, nota bene, is cheap here) and supplemented that with pounds of apples and pears &c. In spite of all that he’s as lean as a pole, with two strong rows of teeth, large red lips, sparkling 
   eyes, a couple of large, usually red, jug-ears, a shorn head (black hair) &c. &c. I assure you, an altogether different creature from that lady by Philippe de Champaigne. This young person was ridiculed a lot in the beginning, even by me. But I nonetheless warmed to him gradually and now, I assure you, I’m very glad of his company in the evenings. He has a completely naїve and unspoiled heart, and works very hard in the firm. Every evening we go home together, eat something or other in my room, and the rest of the evening I read aloud, usually from the Bible. We intend to read it all the way through. In the morning, he’s already there to wake me up, usually between 5 and 6 o’clock; we then have breakfast in my room and go to the gallery around 8 o’clock. Recently he’s begun to eat with more moderation, and he’s started to collect prints, with my help. Yesterday we went to the Luxembourg together and I showed him the paintings I like best there. 
   And truthfully, unto babes is revealed much that is hidden from the wise. J. Breton, Alone, The blessing of the corn, Calling the gleaners6 Brion, Noah, The pilgrims of St Odile. Bernier, Fields in winter8 Cabat. The pond and Autumnal evening9 Emile Breton, Winter evening. Bodmer, Fontainebleau11 Duverger, The labourer and his children12 Millet, The church at Gréville13 Daubigny, Spring and Autumn14 Français, The end of winter and The cemetery15 Gleyre, Lost illusions16 and Hébert, Christ in the Garden of Olives and Malaria, also Rosa Bonheur, Ploughing18 &c. Also a painting by ? (I can’t remember his name), a monastery where monks receive a stranger and suddenly notice that it is Jesus. Written on the wall of the monastery is L’homme s’agite et Dieu le mène. Qui vous reçoit, me recoit et qui Me reçoit, reçoit celui qui m’a envoyé. At the gallery I simply do whatever the hand finds to do, that is our work our whole life long, old boy, may I do it with all my might. 
   Have you done what I advised you to do, have you got rid of the books by Michelet, Renan &c? I believe it will give you peace. You certainly won’t forget that page from Michelet about that portrait of a lady by P. de Champaigne, and don’t forget Renan either, but still, get rid of them. ‘If you have found honey, see to it that you don’t eat too much of it, lest it disagree with you’ it says in Proverbs, or something to that effect. Do you know Erckmann-Chatrian, Le conscrit, Waterloo, and especially L’ami Fritz and also Madame Thérèse? Read them some time if you can get hold of them. A change of fare whets the appetite (provided we take especial care to eat simply; not for nothing is it written ‘Give us this day our daily bread’), and the bow cannot always stay bent. You won’t take it amiss if I tell you to do one thing and another. I know you have your wits about you as well. Do not think everything good, and learn to distinguish for yourself between relative good and evil; and let that feeling show you the right way with guidance from above because, old boy, it’s so necessary ‘that God dispose us’. Do write again soon with some particulars, give my regards to my acquaintances, especially Mr Tersteeg and his family, and I wish you the very best. Adieu, believe me ever, Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 14 Oct. 1875. My dear Theo, Yet again a few lines to cheer myself up as well as you. I advised you to get rid of your books, and I still advise you to do so, certainly, just do it; it will give you peace. But while you’re doing it, take care not to become narrow-minded and to shy away from reading what is well written; on the contrary, that is a comfort in our lives. ‘Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be 
   any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.’2 Just seek light and freedom and don’t delve too deeply into the mire of the world. How much I’d like to have you here, and show you the Luxembourg and the Louvre &c., though I have the idea that in time you’ll be coming here too. I’ve had rather a good letter from Anna, I’m sending it to you to read, but send it back. Pa once wrote to me ‘don’t forget the story of Icarus, who wanted to fly to the sun and, having arrived at a certain height, lost his wings and fell into the sea’. You’ll often feel that neither I nor Anna are what we hope to become, and that we’re still a long way from Pa and others, that we’re lacking in solidity and simplicity and sincerity; one can’t become simple and true all at once. But let’s persevere nonetheless, but above all be patient, those who believe shall not make haste;4 yet there is a difference between 
   our desire to become Christians and that of Icarus to fly to the sun. I believe it can do no harm to have a relatively strong body, so take care to eat enough, and if occasionally you’re terribly hungry, or rather have a terrible urge to eat, be sure to eat well. I assure you that I also do it often enough and above all, have done. Especially bread, I believe, old boy, don’t hesitate, ‘Bread is the staff of life’ as the English say5 (although they also have a taste for meat, and even much too much of it in general). And now, write to me again soon and tell me about everyday things too. Remain steadfast, and give my regards to anyone who asks after me. Let’s hope we see each other in 10 weeks or so. I shake your hand heartily in thought, and am ever, Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 9 Nov. 1875. My dear Theo, It’s time you heard from me again, though this will only be a short note, for I haven’t much time. Thanks for what you sent me, I’m glad to have it. I’m glad that you were in Etten on the day of the induction, for Pa and Ma’s sake as well as yours. You must write and tell me what it was like. Uncle Vincent and Aunt2 left yesterday. I went to see them quite often. I’m sorry I didn’t see them at the train yesterday when they left. Herewith a letter, give it to Uncle when you see him, it explains why we didn’t see each other at the station. 
   Autumn is really here, you’ll be going for walks fairly often. Do you get up early? I do regularly, it’s good to make a habit of it. It’s precious and already very dear to me, that early morning twilight. I usually go to bed early in the evening. Every morning my worthy Englishman cooks barley porridge; how I’d like you to be here in the morning sometime. Anna seems to get up early as well. She doesn’t have it easy, and she certainly makes herself very useful. Well, more soon, probably. Do write again soon, and freely. I shake your hand in thought, and am ever Your loving brother Vincent Paris, 15 Nov. 1875. My dear Theo, Herewith a note for Uncle Haanebeek. I hadn’t written since Annet died, and felt the need to do so at last. Do you ever go there? In any case you’ll deliver the letter yourself, won’t you? My worthy Englishman now cooks barley porridge every morning; he got 25 pounds of it from his father. How I wish you could try it sometime. 
   I’m really very glad to have met that boy. I’ve learned from him and was able, in turn, to draw his attention to a danger that was threatening him. He had never been away from home and, although he didn’t let it show, he had an unwholesome (though noble) yearning for his father and his home. He yearned with a yearning that belongs to God and heaven. Idolatry is not love. He who loves his parents must follow them on life’s path. He now sees this clearly and, with some genuine sorrow in his heart, he has the courage and the desire to go on. Has Pa already said to you what he once said to me? Keep thy heart above all things; for out of it are the issues of life. Let us do that, then, and with God’s help we shall succeed. 
   I wish you well, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 4 Dec. 1875 My dear Theo, A few words in haste because tomorrow is the Feast of St Nicholas. That’s such a nice day in Holland, I’d like to see it again sometime. It’s time for Christmas to come, don’t you think? We’ll have a great deal to talk about. It’s a pity that Anna can’t come either;2 I so much hope that she’ll have a good time then too. Christmas in England is very special, and perhaps Anna will become even more attached to her surroundings if she celebrates it there and helps to make things pleasant in the house there. My worthy Englishman (his name is Gladwell) is also going home for a couple of days. You can imagine how much he longs for it; he has never really been away from home before. 
   Do write again soon. Do you ever visit Uncle Cor? If he should ever invite you, accept by all means, and give him my regards if you see him. Is it as cold there as it is here? Gladwell and I are very cosy by our little stove, mornings and evenings. I’ve taken up pipe-smoking again, and sometimes it tastes just as good as it used to. Regards to everyone who asks after me, especially to the Rooses, and also to Jan and Piet. I shake your hand heartily in thought, and am ever Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 9 Dec. 1875 My dear Theo, This morning I heard from home what happened to you, and I wanted to write to you immediately. If only I knew what I could do for you. One of these days a crate will be going to The Hague; I’ll put some chocolate in it. Gladwell calls that ‘Consolation’. I’ll also send you the little book by Jules Breton, at least if I can get it back. I’ve lent it out. I’m very anxious to hear how you are, so drop me a line soon and tell me in detail, if you will, how it was with you those days. How I’d like to be with you, Theo, but what can we do about it? It can’t be helped, old boy. In a fortnight 
   I’ll be going home, and then we hope to see each other in any case, and our seeing each other won’t be any the less wonderful for what has happened. If you should see Uncle Jan, please give him my regards and thank him for his letter. I received a letter from Anna today. I believe she’s reconciled to celebrating Christmas there, with a will and enthusiasm, and will help to make it a success. You must try and become good friends with Uncle Jan; I don’t know him well, but I do know he is ‘fine gold’. How cold it’s been. Fortunately, it started to thaw here yesterday, which was fine with me. These last few days I’ve been busy with the inventory &c., and trying to finish off one thing and another before I leave. And now Theo, in thought a hearty handshake, my heartfelt wishes for your recovery, old chap. Ever Your most loving brother Vincent.  Paris, 10 Dec. 1875 My dear Theo, Herewith what I promised. You’ll like the book by Jules Breton. There’s one poem of his that I found especially moving: ‘Illusions’. Blessed are those whose hearts are thus attuned. All things work together for good to them that love God2 is a beautiful saying. It will be so for you, too; and the aftertaste of these difficult days will be good. But write and tell me soon how things are and when the doctor says you’ll be better, if you haven’t done so already, that is. In a fortnight I hope to be in Etten, you can imagine how much I’m looking forward to it. 
   Have I already told you that I’ve taken up pipe-smoking &c. again? I’ve rediscovered in my pipe an old, trusty friend, and I imagine we’ll never part again. I heard from Uncle Vincent that you smoke too. Tell everyone at the Rooses’ especially that I bid them good-day; you and I have had a lot of good times in their house, and have met with much loyalty. We have ‘Sunday morning’ by Emile Breton here at present. You know it, don’t you? It’s a village street with farmhouses and sheds, and at the end the church surrounded by poplars. Everything covered with snow and little black figures going to church. It tells us that winter is cold but that there are warm human hearts. I wish you the very best, old boy, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent The packages of chocolate marked X are for you, the other two are for Mrs Roos. Smoke the cigarettes with your housemates. Adieu.  Paris, 13 Dec. 1875 My dear Theo, I’d been longing to receive your letter of this morning, and am very glad that you’re getting better again. The parcel for you was sent only today; the little book by Jules Breton is in it. I’m longing for Christmas and to see you, old boy, but now we’ll be there soon enough. I’ll probably be leaving here Thursday week, in the evening. Do everything you can to get as long a holiday as possible. One more thing, though, please forgive my saying it. You and I both liked the poems by Heine and Uhland, but watch out, old boy, it’s pretty dangerous stuff. The illusion won’t last long, don’t surrender to it. Shouldn’t you get rid of those little books I wrote in for you?
   Those books by Heine and Uhland will fall into your hands again later on, and then you’ll read them with different feelings and with a calmer heart. I like Erckmann-Chatrian very much, you know that. Do you know L’ami Fritz? To return again to Heine. Take the portrait of Father and Mother and take ‘Farewells’ by Brion, and then read Heine with those three before your eyes; then you’ll see what I mean. But, old chap, surely you know that I’m not lecturing you or preaching a moralizing sermon. I know you have in your heart what I have in mine, that’s why I sometimes talk to you so seriously. But in any event try this test sometime. And now, get well soon and do write again soon. How is Willem Valkis? Give my regards to him and to all your housemates and to all who know me, also Van Iterson. We have a beautiful painting by Schreyer here at present, a wagon with horses in an autumnal landscape at sunset. Also a splendid Jacque, a sombre landscape 
   with sheep. What do you think of that small Jacque, ‘Ploughing’, which has been in The Hague for some time? I sincerely wish you the best and, again, a speedy recovery. Ever Your loving brother. Vincent  Paris, 10 January 1875. My dear Theo, I haven’t written to you since we saw each other; in the meantime something has happened that didn’t come as a total surprise to me. When I saw Mr Boussod again I asked if His Hon. indeed thought it a good thing for me to go on working in the firm this year, since His Hon. had never had any very serious complaints against me. The latter was indeed the case, though, and His Hon. took the words out of my mouth, so to speak, saying that I would leave on 1 April, thanking the gentlemen for anything I might have learned in their firm. When an apple is ripe, all it takes is a gentle breeze to make it fall from the tree, it’s also like that here. I’ve certainly done things that were in some way very wrong, and so have little to say. 
   And now, old boy, so far I’m really rather in the dark about what I should do, but we must try and keep hope and courage alive. Be so good as to let Mr Tersteeg read this letter, His Hon. may know it, but I believe it’s better that you speak to no one else of it for the time being, and behave as if nothing is going on. Do write again soon, and believe me ever, Your loving brother Vincent.   Paris, January 1876 My dear Theo, In the first crate going to The Hague you’ll find various packages; be so good as to take care of them. First of all, one for you containing ‘Felix Holt’, when you’ve read it please send it to Etten, and when they’ve finished it there please send it back here, when you get the chance, because it doesn’t belong to me. It’s a book that touched me deeply, and it will no doubt have the same effect on you. There’s also a package for Mr Tersteeg and one for Mrs Tersteeg, and also one for Mauve and his wife. I wrote and told Mauve that he should ask you for that book about Michel;3 please show it to him sometime when it suits you. 
   There’s also a package for Pa; do your best to ensure that it arrives in Etten on Pa’s birthday. Perhaps you could add Felix Holt to it and read it after it’s been in Etten, that might be the best thing. In the small roll addressed to you you’ll find 3 etchings after Jules Dupré, one for you, one for Uncle Jan van Gogh, with my regards, and one for Pa. Also for Pa a lithograph after Bodmer5 and an etching by Jacque, and then there’s a lithograph after Cabat for you. Cabat is a lot like Ruisdael, there are two magnificent paintings by him in the Luxembourg, one a pond with trees around it in the autumn at sunset, and the other the evening of a grey autumn day, a road by the waterside and a couple of large oak trees. That etching after Jules Dupré is beautiful, it’s one from an album of 6 with Dupré’s portrait. He has such a simple and noble face, it reminds me a bit of Mauve’s, though he’s older, and perhaps in reality he looks different from Mauve. 
   It’s good that you’re taking English lessons, you won’t regret it. I’d like to send you a Longfellow10 and ‘Andersen’s fairy tales’, I’ll see if I can find them. If I do send them, read especially Longfellow’s Evangeline, Miles Standish, The baron of St Castine and King Robert of Sicily &c. And now I’ll bid you good-day again and shake your hand in thought. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and if anyone else should ask after me, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent. Give my regards again to my friend Borchers.  My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, write to me often, as I long for it these days. Write in more detail, too, and about everyday things; you see that I, too, am doing that more and more. I was interested to hear what you said about Boks, how he has arranged his studio and that you go there quite a lot. Do keep me well informed. We sometimes feel rather lonely and long for friends, and think we’d be quite different and happier if only we found ‘it’, a friend of whom we would say, ‘this is it’. But you, too, will already have started to notice that there’s a lot of self-deception behind this, and that this longing, if we were to surrender to it too much, 
   would cause us to stray from the path. There are words that keep haunting me these days, they are the text for today: ‘His children shall seek to please the poor.’4 And now for some news, namely that my friend Gladwell is going to move. One of the employees at the printer’s has persuaded him to come and live with him; he had already tried to do this before. Gladwell has done it, I believe, without thinking. I’m awfully sorry he’s going. It will be soon now, probably at the end of this month. For a few days now we’ve had a mouse in our ‘cabin’; that’s what we call our room, you know. Every evening we put some bread out, and it already knows how to find it. I read the advertisements in the English newspapers and have already written to a couple, we’re hoping for a godsend. And now, regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to any others who might ask after me, and do write again soon. Adieu. Ever, Your loving brother Vincent If Mr Tersteeg should speak to you about me, write and tell me. Give my regards to His Hon. every time I write to you.  Paris, 2 February 1876. My dear Theo, Would you do me a great favour? You know that 15-cent edition of ‘Andersen’s vertellingen van de maan’, translated by the Rev. Ten Kate. Could you send me a copy of it when you get the chance? It’s only tomorrow that a crate will be going to The Hague in which I’ll enclose the packages in question. The one for Pa can no longer arrive at Etten in time, but send it as soon as possible anyway. 
   I still haven’t had a reply to various letters I wrote in response to advertisements. Nor did Uncle Vincent answer me. I asked Mr Obach whether any people desiring information about me could apply to him, and His Hon. replied with a very kind letter. At any rate, old boy, we can only continue quietly with our eyes on Him whom we think of when we say ‘Who will shew us any good?’3 Adieu, regards to anyone who might ask after me, and ever Your loving brother. Vincent  Paris, 7 February 1876 My dear Theo, My hearty congratulations to you on the occasion of Pa’s birthday. It’s a beautiful text, the one for 8 February:1 Faithful is He that calleth you, who also will do it. What that it will be for our Father and for us we do not know, but in a sense we can leave that to Him whose name is ‘Our Father’3 and ‘I am that I am’. Today I received a letter in reply to one of mine; they asked whether I could teach French, German and drawing, and also requested a portrait. I’ll answer today;5 if I hear more I’ll write to you directly. Thanks for the little book by Andersen, I’m glad to have it. It’s for reading aloud to a Dutchman, one of the employees I’ve been seeing 
   a lot of lately. Yesterday I went to an English church here, it was a nice experience to attend such an English service again, which has much that is simple and beautiful. The sermon was on ‘The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He maketh me to lay down in green pastures, He leadeth me gently by still waters. He restoreth my soul and leadeth me in the paths of righteousness. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I shall fear no evil for Thou art with me, Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall surround me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the House of the Lord for ever.’8 Thanks again for the little book by Andersen, and in thought a handshake, and regards to everyone at the Rooses’. I heard from home that Mr Tersteeg had been in Etten. In haste. Ever, Your loving brother. Vincent  Paris, 19 February 1876 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, and also for the catalogue that was in the last crate. Have I already thanked you for ‘Andersen’s vertellingen’, if not, then I do so now. I heard from home that you’ll be making the trip with the nouveautés in the spring, you’ll surely have nothing against that, it’s good experience and you’ll see lots of beautiful things during your trip. You’ll find Longfellow in the next crate. Gladwell was here yesterday evening – he comes every Friday – and we read some more of it. I haven’t read Hyperion3 yet, but have heard that it’s beautiful. 
   These last few days I’ve been reading a beautiful book by Eliot, 3 stories, ‘Scenes of clerical life’. The last story, Janet’s repentance, I found especially moving. It’s the life of a curate who lives chiefly among the inhabitants of the dirty streets of a town. His study looked out over gardens with cabbage stalks &c. and over the red roofs and smoking chimneys of poor cottages. For his midday meal he usually had badly cooked mutton and watery potatoes. He died at about the age of 34, and was nursed during his long illness by a woman who had previously been given to drink but, through his words and by leaning on him, as it were, had got the better of herself and found peace for her soul. And at his funeral they read the chapter with the words ‘I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live’. And now it’s already Saturday evening, the days 
   fly by here, and the time of my departure will soon be here. Still no answer from Scarborough. Regards, and in thought a handshake, and ever, Your loving brother. Vincent Regards to everyone at the Rooses’, and also to Van Iterson, Jan and Piet.  Paris, 15 March 1876 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter; thank Mauve and his wife for theirs, too, if you will, which I was glad to receive. I’m very eager to see the two paintings by M. that are going to the Salon. Gladwell may be coming back to his old room; he’s taking my place here in the gallery. Is it also blowing up a storm like this in The Hague? Here for a few days already, almost continuously. You should know that if nothing unforeseen happens I’ll go to Etten first. I’m thinking of leaving here on 1 April or perhaps 31 March. 
   I hear from home that you’re also thinking of stopping in Etten in the course of your trip. When are you leaving? I hope I’ll get the chance to send you the Longfellow before you leave. It might be a good book to take along. My time here is running out awfully fast, less than three weeks to go now. Meekness and longsuffering3 are also in my thoughts sometimes, every now and then. Aunt Cornelie4 gave me a nice book to read, ‘Kenelm Chillingly’ by Bulwer. There’s much that’s beautiful in it. It’s about the fate of the son of a rich Englishman who can find no rest or peace among his peers and goes to seek it in other circles. He nonetheless ends up returning to his own class, but doesn’t regret what he did. And now, adieu, have a good trip, I wish you well and hope you see many beautiful things, in case you leave before my next letter arrives. Ever, Your loving brother. Vincent  Paris, 23 March 1876 My dear Theo, Herewith the book by Longfellow, it will no doubt become a friend of yours. Today I responded to two more advertisements, I’ll go on doing it, even though most of my letters remain unanswered. My time here is running out. You’ll surely see many beautiful things on your trip;1 although a feeling for nature isn’t it, it’s nonetheless a wonderful thing to have; may it always remain with us. And now you’ll be ‘boarding in many inns’, that’s also a singular pleasure at times. You know that I once went to Brighton on foot. I always think back on it with pleasure. Lodging-houses in England are often so pleasant, 
  Longfellow describes this well in Tales of the wayside inn. Gladwell is getting my place at the gallery; he’s there already, learning the ropes before I leave. I’ve seen quite a few paintings that are going to the Salon, including two very beautiful, large Gabriëls, a morning in the meadows, through the dew one sees a town in the distance, the other one was what we would call a watery sun. Also 2 large Xavier de Cocks, one of them an evening at the beginning of summer, a meadow surrounded by poplars; in the distance a farmhouse and fields and a girl bringing the cows home. In the foreground a pond, next to which 3 cows – a white one, a black one and a red one – lie in the grass; the sun has already set and the sky is pale yellow, the trees dark against it. I’m writing in great haste, as you’ll see from my handwriting. Have a good trip, and ever, Your loving brother Vincent  Paris, 28 March 1876 My dear Theo, A few more words, probably the last I’ll write to you from Paris. I’ll probably leave here on Friday evening to be home on Saturday morning at the same time as at Christmas. Yesterday I saw around 6 paintings by Michel, how I wish you’d been there, sunken roads through sandy soil leading to a mill, or a man going home over the heath or sandy ground with a grey sky above, so simple and so fine. It seems to me that the pilgrims on their way to Emmaus3 saw nature as Michel does, I always think of them whenever I see one of his paintings. At the same time I saw a painting by Jules Dupré, 
    and a very large one at that. As far as the eye could see, black marshy terrain, in the middle distance a river and in the foreground a pond (near it 3 horses). Reflected in both, the bank of white and grey clouds behind which the sun has set; on the horizon some greyish red and purple, the upper sky a gentle blue. I saw these paintings at Durand-Ruel’s. There they have no fewer than 25 etchings after Millet, and the same number after Michel, and masses after Dupré and Corot and all other artists, to be had for 1 franc apiece. That’s tempting indeed. I couldn’t resist buying a couple after Millet:5 I bought the last 3 of The evening angelus, and my brother will of course receive one when the opportunity arises. I hear that Mr Iterson is coming to live at the Rooses’, he’s the youngest, I believe. Write again soon. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg and to anyone who might ask after me, and in thought a handshake, and ever Your loving brother Vincent. Adieu! Ramsgate, 17 April 1876. My dear Theo, I arrived here safe and sound yesterday afternoon at 1 o’clock, and one of my first impressions was that the window of the not-very-large school looks out over the sea. It’s a boarding school and there are 24 boys between the ages of 10 and 14. Mr Stokes is out of town for a couple of days and so I haven’t seen His Honour yet, but he’s expected back this evening. There’s another assistant teacher, 17 years old. Yesterday evening and this morning we all took a walk by the sea. Herewith a bit of seaweed. The houses on the sea-front are mostly built of yellow brick in the style of those in Nassaulaan in The Hague (but taller), and have gardens full of cedars and other dark evergreen shrubs. There’s a harbour full of all kinds of ships, closed in by stone jetties running into the sea on which one can walk. And further out one sees the sea in its natural state, and that’s beautiful. Yesterday everything was grey. I’m shortly going to unpack my trunks which have just been brought, and hang up some prints in my room. (The assistant teacher, 4 boys and I sleep in another house close by.) It’s the holidays2 just now, so I haven’t had to give any lessons yet. I’m anxious to 
   see Mr Stokes. I must go out with the boys, adieu. Ever Your most loving brother Vincent. Ramsgate, 21 April 1876 My dear Theo, Enclosed you’ll find a Post office Order for 10 shillings;1 be so good as to place the enclosed advertisement for Anna for that amount in some newspaper or other, you decide which one. If it’s not enough I’ll send you the rest, and if it’s too much, buy some photograph or other for Etten, for 21 May. But in any event please tell me how much you pay for the advertisement; I do want to have the address as it may be of further use. I hope so much that Anna will find something; Willemien will be going home soon now. Mr Stokes didn’t come back until today; he’s a rather large man with a bald head and whiskers. The boys seem to respect him yet love him all the same; he was already playing marbles with them, only a couple of hours after he got back. We go to the beach often; this morning I helped the boys build a sand-castle like those we made in the garden at Zundert. How much I’d like you to be able to look through the school window. The house stands on a square (all the houses around it are the same, which is often the case here). In the middle of the square a 
   large green, closed in by an iron fence and surrounded by lilac bushes. The boys play there during the midday break. The house where I have my room is on the same square. When I was in Rotterdam and saw that I’d have to wait there a long time, I very nearly came to The Hague, even went to the station. And yet I didn’t do it, I hope that later I’ll be able to see everyone and everything there again with a calmer eye. Saying farewell at home on Good Friday is something I won’t forget. In the morning we went to  Hoeven5 together to attend church and the Lord’s Supper, and Father said there: ‘Arise, let us go hence’. And in the afternoon we did arise, and through the small window I saw Pa and little brother8 in the road, watching the train leave. And Sunday afternoon I was in the church in Ramsgate and was struck by the words written there on the wall, which you’ll find in Anna’s letter (enclosed for you to read, but send it back). Enclosed is the advertisement in question. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to anyone else who might ask after me, also to Borchers, if you run into him. Do you still go there now and then? I shake your hand in thought, and ever Your loving brother Vincent Do write soon. A young lady, a clergyman’s daughter, having worked in England for some time, is looking for a situation as lady’s companion or nurse to a sickly lady. Address: G.H.M. Post Office, Welwyn (Herts)12 (England). Tell no one that you’re placing the advertisement. You can see from the letter that she’d prefer you didn’t. Ramsgate, 28 April 1876 My dear Theo, Many happy returns; my hearty congratulations on this day, may our love for one another only increase as we get older. I’m so happy that we have so much in common, not only memories of the past but also that you’re working for the same firm I worked for until now, and therefore know so many people and places that I know too, and that you love nature and art so much. You’ll have received that letter containing Anna’s advertisement in good order. There’s also an advertisement in the Daily News;2 now we can only hope that something will come of it. Mr Stokes told me that he intends to move after the holidays – with the whole school, naturally – to a village on the Thames, around 3 hours from London. He would then furnish the school somewhat differently and perhaps expand it. Now let me tell you about a walk we took yesterday. It was to an inlet of the sea, and the road to it led through the fields 
   of young wheat and along hedgerows of hawthorn etc. When we got there we had on our left a high, steep wall of sand and stone, as high as a two-storey house, on top of which stood old, gnarled hawthorn bushes. Their black or grey, lichen-covered stems and branches had all been bent to the same side by the wind, also a few elder bushes. The ground we walked on was completely covered with large grey stones, chalk and shells. To the right the sea, as calm as a pond, reflecting the delicate grey sky where the sun was setting. It was ebb tide and the water was very low. Thanks for your letter of yesterday, I think it very nice that Willem Valkis will be joining the branch. Give him my particular regards. I’d like to walk with you both sometime through the Bosjes5 to Scheveningen. Have a pleasant day today, and give my regards to everyone who asks after me, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent. 
   I wish you well today, old boy, and begin a happy and blessed year. These are important years for us both, years on which much already depends. May everything turn out well. I’ll be glad when Anna has found something, but situations like the ones she is looking for are rather scarce. A sickly lady here who needed someone to look after her received 300 replies to her advertisement. I shake your hand heartily in thought. Adieu! Ramsgate, 1 May 1876 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, and for placing the advertisement. It would be good to place it again. The postal order was in the letter, wasn’t it? The wind was blowing so hard here yesterday afternoon that Mr Stokes didn’t want the boys to go out. I asked permission anyway for 6 of the oldest boys and myself to go out for a walk. We went to the beach; the seas were high and it was difficult to walk against the wind. We saw the lifeboat being pulled by a steamboat, coming back from a ship that had been stranded on a sandbank a long way off;1 but they hadn’t brought anything back. I know that painting by Willems very well;2 the drawing by Mauve you wrote about 
   must be beautiful. Do you ever go and see him in his studio? And now you ask what I have to teach the boys; chiefly French, fundamentals, one boy has started to learn German, and also a variety of things like sums, hearing them their lessons, giving dictations &c. For the time being, then, giving the lessons isn’t so difficult, but it’ll be more difficult to make the boys learn them. And now today is your birthday, I shake your hand in thought, and once again I sincerely wish you blessings and all the best. Outside school hours, of course, the boys are pretty much under my supervision, and that takes up quite a lot of my time and will probably do so more and more. Last Saturday night I washed 6 or so of the young gentlemen; I did this for fun, though, and because it helped us to finish on time, not because I had to do it. I’ve also tried to get them to read, I have quite a few things that would be suitable for them, ‘The wide, wide world’5 &c. &c. And now good-day, thanks for your letter, for placing the advertisement, and for sending the newspaper, and ever Your loving brother Vincent 
   One of these days you’ll be receiving a couple of English hymnals, I’ll mark a few of them. There is so very much that is beautiful in them. One grows very fond of them, especially when one has heard them here so often. Ramsgate, 6 May 1876 My dear Theo, Herewith you’ll find the 2 books I promised you. I’ve marked a few things in them, but you’ll certainly find many beautiful things in addition to these. As I wrote to you already, though, one starts to grow especially fond of them when one lives in the country itself. It’s already Saturday evening again; the weather’s beautiful today: the sea is very calm and it’s low tide at the moment, the sky is a delicate whitish blue with a haze in the distance. Early this morning it was also beautiful, everything was clear, where now it’s more or less hazy. This town has something very singular, one notices the sea in everything; but you know this special quality, too, because one finds it in The Hague and Scheveningen as well. Did you know that Anna
   has received an answer to her advertisements? This week she sent me 3 letters she’d received. I’m longing to hear what she’s decided. One of the letters came from Amsterdam, a situation as companion to an old lady, another letter was from Vaals2 and yet another from here in England. She may have received even more since then. She seems awfully eager for an opportunity to come into contact with families; in Amsterdam she would find this at once through Uncle Cor and Uncle Stricker. Do you still visit Uncle Cor now and then? Sometimes I long to see him so much; just yesterday I wrote to him. Keep him as your friend, there can’t be any harm in that. Sometime you must tell Mr Tersteeg about the school here. These are really happy days, the ones I’m spending here, day 
   after day, and yet it’s a happiness and peacefulness that I don’t trust entirely, though one thing can lead to another. A person isn’t easily satisfied, one moment he finds things far too good and the next he’s not satisfied enough. But I’m saying this by the by, we would do better not to talk about it, but rather continue quietly on our way. Have a good Sunday morning, and give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’, also to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg and Betsy, and in thought a handshake from Your loving brother Vincent Ramsgate, 12 May 1876 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter; I also like ‘Tell me the old, old story’1 very much. I first heard it sung in Paris, in the evening in a small church I used to attend sometimes. No. 122 is also beautiful. I regret not having gone to hear Moody and Sankey when they were in London. There’s such a yearning for Religion among the people in those big cities. Many a worker in a factory or shop has had a remarkable, pure, pious youth. But city life often takes away ‘the early dew of morning’, yet the yearning for ‘the old, old story’ remains, the bottom of one’s heart remains the bottom of one’s heart. In one of his books, Eliot describes the 
   life of factory workers &c. who have joined a small community and hold religious services in a chapel in ‘Lantern Yard’, and he says it is ‘God’s Kingdom upon earth’, nothing more nor less. And there’s something moving about seeing the thousands now flocking to hear those evangelists. I think your plan to give Pa and Ma ‘After the departure’ by Sadée6 is very good; that’s agreed, then. Willemien may be already there on 21 May. I see from your letter that you’re also thinking of going. Do it, old boy, if you can manage it. Sometimes such actions receive a special blessing. How it would surprise them. There was something wistful in Ma’s last letter, in which she wrote a word or two about the necessity of our being so far from home. 
   And Ma’s eyes are hurting her again. Come on, old boy, brighten them up again by being there on that day. This afternoon Mr Reid7 sent me the catalogue of the exhibition in London. In thought a handshake, and congratulations on the birthdays of Lies and Cor, and also on 21 May. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’. In haste. Your loving brother. Vincent. Ramsgate, 31 May 1876 My dear Theo, Bully for you, being in Etten on 21 May, happily there were 4 of the 6 at home. Pa wrote to me in detail about everything that happened that day. Thanks, too, for your last letter. Have I already written to you about the storm I saw recently? The sea was yellowish, especially close to the beach; a streak of light on the horizon and, above this, tremendously huge dark grey clouds from which one saw the rain coming down in slanting streaks. The wind blew the dust from the small white path on the rocks into the sea and tossed the blossoming hawthorn bushes and wallflowers that grow on the rocks. On the right, fields of young green wheat, and, in the distance, the town with its towers, mills, slate roofs and houses built in Gothic style, and, below, the harbour between the 2 jetties running out into the sea, looking like the cities Albrecht Dürer used to etch. I also saw the sea last Sunday night, everything was dark grey, but day was beginning to break on the horizon. It was still very early, 
   and yet a lark was already singing. And the nightingales in the gardens on the sea-front. In the distance the light of the lighthouse, the guard-ship &c. That same night I looked out of the window of my room onto the roofs of the houses one sees from there and the tops of the elms, dark against the night sky. Above those roofs, one single star, but a nice, big friendly one. And I thought of us all, and I thought of the years of my life that had already passed, and of our home, and the words and feeling came to me, ‘Keep me from being a son that causeth shame, give me Your blessing, not because I deserve it, but for my Mother’s sake. Thou art Love, beareth all things. Without your constant blessing we can do nothing.’ Herewith a little drawing of the view from the school window where the boys stand and watch their parents going back to the station after a visit. Many a boy will never forget the view from that window. You should have seen it this week when we had rainy days, especially in the twilight when the 
   street-lamps are being lit and their light is reflected in the wet street. Mr Stokes was sometimes moody during those days, and when the boys were too boisterous for him it sometimes happened that they didn’t get their bread and tea in the evening. You should have seen them then, standing at the window looking out, it was really rather sad. They have so little apart from their food and drink to look forward to and to get them through the day. I’d also like you to see them going down the dark stairs and small corridor to table. On that, however, the friendly sun shines. Another extraordinary place is the room with the rotten floor where there are 6 basins at which they wash themselves, with only a feeble light falling onto the washstand through a window with broken panes. It’s quite a melancholy sight, to be sure. How I’d like to spend or to have spent a winter with them, to know what it’s like. The youngsters are making an oil stain on your little drawing, forgive them. 
   Herewith a few words for Uncle Jan. And now good-night, if anyone should ask after me bid them good-day. Do you still visit Borchers once in a while? Give him my regards if you see him, and also Willem Valkis and everyone at the Rooses’. A handshake in thought from Your loving Vincent 
    Welwyn, 17 June 18761 My dear Theo, Last Monday I left Ramsgate for London. That’s a long walk indeed, and when I left it was awfully hot and it remained so until the evening, when I arrived at Canterbury. That same evening I walked a bit further until I came to a couple of large beeches and elms next to a small pond, where I rested for a while. In the morning at half past 3 the birds began to sing upon seeing the morning twilight, and I continued on my way. It was good to walk then. In the afternoon I arrived at Chatham, where, in the distance, past partly flooded, low-lying meadows, with elms here and there, one sees the Thames full of ships. It’s always grey weather there, I think. There I met a cart that brought me a couple of miles further, but then the driver went into an inn and I thought he might stay there a long time, so I walked on and arrived towards evening in the well-known suburbs of London and walked on towards the city down the long, long ‘Roads’. I stayed in London for two days and often ran from one end of the city to the other in order to see various people, including a minister to whom I’d written. Herewith a translation of the letter, I’m 
   sending it to you because you should know that the feeling I have as I start out is ‘Father, I am not worthy!’5 and ‘Father be merciful to me!’6 Should I find anything it will probably be a situation somewhere between minister and missionary, in the suburbs of London among working folk. Don’t speak about this to anyone, Theo. My salary at Mr Stokes’s will be very small. Probably only board and lodging and some free time in which to teach, or if there’s no free time, at most 20 pounds a year. But to continue: I spent one night at Mr Reid’s8 and the next at Mr Gladwell’s, where they were very, very kind. Mr Gladwell kissed me good-night and that did me good, may it be granted me sometime in the future to show some more friendship to his son every now and then. I wanted to leave for Welwyn that evening, but they literally held me back by force because of the pouring rain. However, when it had let up somewhat, around 4 in the morning, I set out for Welwyn. First a long walk from one end of the city to the other, something like 10 miles (each taking 20 minutes). In the afternoon at 5, I was with our sister and was very glad to see her. She looks well and you would be as pleased with her room as I am, with ‘Good Friday’, ‘Christ in the Garden of Olives’, ‘Mater Dolorosa’9 &c. with ivy around them instead of frames. Old boy, when you read my letter to that minister you’ll perhaps say: he’sb not so bad after all, though in fact he is. Think of him as he is, however, every once in a while. A handshake in thought from Your loving brother Vincent 
   Rev. Sir. A clergyman’s son, who, because he must work to earn a living, has no money and no time to study at King’s College, and who, besides that, is already a couple of years older than is usual for someone starting there, and has not even begun on the preparatory studies of Latin and Greek, would, in spite of everything, dearly like to find a situation connected with the church, even though the position of a clergyman who has had college training is beyond his reach. My father is a clergyman in a village in Holland. When I was 11 years old I started going to school and stayed there until I was 16. At that time I had to choose a profession and didn’t know what to choose. Through the offices of one of my uncles, an associate in the firm of Goupil & Co., art dealers and publishers of engravings, I was given a position in his branch at The Hague. I worked for the firm for 3 years. From there I went to London to learn English, and after 2 years from there to Paris. Forced by various circumstances to quit the firm, however, I left Messrs G.&Co. and have since taught for 2 months at Mr Stokes’s school at Ramsgate. As my goal is a situation connected with the church, however, I must look further. 
   Although I have not been trained for the church, perhaps my past life of travelling, living in various countries, associating with a variety of people, rich and poor, religious and not religious, working at a variety of jobs, days of manual labour in between days of office work &c., perhaps also my speaking various languages, will compensate in part for my lack of formal training. But what I should prefer to give as my reason for commending myself to you is my innate love of the church and that which concerns the church, which has at times lain dormant, though it awakened repeatedly, and – if I may say so, despite feelings of great inadequacy and shortcoming – the Love of God and of humankind. And also, when I think of my past life and of my father’s house in that Dutch village, a feeling of ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy hired servants. Be merciful to me.’15 When I was living in London I often attended your church and I have not forgotten you. Now I am asking you for a recommendation in my search for a situation, and to keep a fatherly eye on me should I find such a situation. I have been left very much to myself; I believe that your fatherly eye could do me good, now that The early dew of morning has passed away at noon. Thanking you in advance for whatever you may be willing to do for me... Isleworth. My dear Theo, There may well come a time when I look back with a certain nostalgia on the ‘excesses of Egypt’2 connected with other situations, namely earning more money and being in many respects of more consequence in the world – this I foresee. There is however ‘bread enough and to spare’3 in the houses I’ll be visiting as I continue down the road I’ve taken, but not money to spare. And yet I so clearly see light in the distance, and if that light disappears now and then it’s mostly my own fault. It’s very questionable whether I’ll go far in this profession, whether those 6 years spent in the firm of Messrs Goupil & Co., during which I should have been training for this situation, won’t always be a thorn in my flesh, as it were. 
   I believe, however, that on no account can I turn back now, even if part of me should wish to (later, this isn’t the case now). These days it seems to me that there are no situations in the world other than those ranging from schoolmaster to clergyman and everything in between: missionary, ‘London missionary’4 &c. &c. Being a London missionary is rather special, I believe; one has to go around among the workers and the poor spreading God’s word and, if one has some experience, speak to them, track down and seek to help foreigners looking for work, or other people who are in some sort of difficulty, etc. etc. Last week I was in London a couple of times to find out if there’s a possibility of my becoming one. Because I speak various languages and have tended to associate, especially in Paris and London, with people from the poorer classes and foreigners, and being a foreigner myself, I may well be suited 
   to this, and could become so more and more. To do this, however, one has to be at least 24 years old, and so in any case I still have a year to wait. Mr Stokes says he definitely cannot give me a salary, for he can get plenty of people who’ll work for board and lodging alone, which is certainly true. But can that be kept up for long? I’m afraid not; it will be decided soon enough. But, old boy, no matter what the case, I think I can tell you this again, that these couple of months have bound me so closely to the sphere ranging from schoolmaster to clergyman, both through satisfactions associated with those situations and through thorns that have pricked me, that I can no longer turn back. Onward, then! But I can assure you that very distinct difficulties will present themselves very soon, and others are visible on the horizon, and as if one is in a different world from the firm of Messrs Goupil & Co. Will I be getting the small engravings (like those Pa and Ma have) of Christus Consolator and Remunerator7 that you promised me? Write soon if you can find a moment, but send your letter to Pa and Ma, because my address may change soon and Pa and Ma will be the first to know. 
   Last week I was at Hampton Court to see the splendid gardens and long avenues of chestnut and lime trees where masses of crows and rooks have their nests, and also to see the palace and the paintings. There are, among other things, many portraits by Holbein which are very beautiful, and two beautiful Rembrandts (the portrait of his wife and one of a rabbi), and also beautiful Italian portraits by Bellini, Titian, a painting by Leonardo da Vinci, cartoons by Mantegna, a beautiful painting by S. Ruysdael, fruit by Cuyp16 and so on and so forth. I rather wished that you could have been there too; it was a pleasure to see paintings again. And I couldn’t help thinking vividly of the people who have lived at Hampton Court, of Charles i and his wife17 (she was the one who said ‘I thank Thee, God, for having made me Queen, though an unhappy Queen’, and at whose graveside Bossuet spoke19 from the abundance of his heart. Do you have ‘Bossuet, Oraisons funèbres’, you’ll find that eulogy there, there’s a very cheap edition, 50 centimes, I think), and also of Lord and Lady Russell, who would certainly have gone there often. (Guizot described their life in L’amour dans le mariage. Read that sometime if you can get hold of it.) Herewith a feather from one of the rooks there. Do write soon if you can, I’m longing to hear from you, and believe me, after a handshake in thought Your loving brother Vincent Despite my feeling that I am inadequate and that in many respects I lack the qualifications necessary for the situation I have and for the related situation I have my eye on, I nevertheless have at the same time such a feeling of thankfulness, of hope and of something like deliverance! and freedom! despite all kinds of bonds, and the thought of God – despite new shortcomings that occur to me – stays with me more strongly and longer. Isleworth, 8 July 1876 c.o. – Jones Esqre Holme Court1 My dear Theo, Your letter and the prints came as a wonderful surprise this morning while I was weeding the potatoes in the garden. I thank you; the two engravings, Christus Consolator and Remunerator, are already hanging above my reading-desk in my room. God is just, so He will use persuasion to bring those who stray back to the straight path, that’s what you were thinking of when you wrote, may it come to pass. I’m straying in many ways, but there’s still hope. Don’t worry about your wanton life, as you call it, just go quietly on your way. You’re purer than I, and will probably get there sooner and better.  Don’t have too great illusions about the freedom I have; I have my bonds of various kinds, humiliating bonds some of them, and this will only get worse with time; but the words inscribed above Christus Consolator, ‘He is come to preach deliverance to the captives’, are still true today. 
   Now I have a request to make of you. Back then in The Hague I went to a catechist, Hillen, who was living in Bagijnestraat at the time. He took great pains over me and, although I didn’t show it, what he said made an impression on me, and I have a mind to write a word or two to him, perhaps it would give him pleasure. Go and find him if you have the time and can discover his address, and tell him that I’ve become a schoolmaster and, who knows, may later find some kind of situation connected with the church. He’s a very modest man, one who has struggled a lot, I believe; sometimes when I went to see him and took a look at him I couldn’t help thinking that the end of that man will be peace. And give him the enclosed drawing6 for me. How much I’d like to look in on Mauve sometime, what you describe, what you saw the evening you were there, I can picture clearly, as it were. Do write again soon, I wish you well, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent. Please give my regards to Mr Tersteeg and his wife and Betsy, and to everyone at the Rooses’, and anyone else you might see. Don’t tell them about me, though. Tell Jan and Piet7 I bid them good-day as well. As you see, I’ve ended up at the other school8 after all, herewith two prospectuses. If you can recommend the school to anyone wishing to send their boys to England, then do so. Isleworth, 2 August 1876 My dear Theo, I heard from home that you’d be coming home for a day while Anna and Lies were still there; write and tell me if that happened. Mr Jones came home yesterday, and his family, I’d made the boys’ dining room green with Welcome home on the wall in holly and ivy and large bouquets on the table. There’s a lot of holly in the garden here, and a few old trees have had all their branches chopped off. These are now full of new branches, pure white or yellowish, with a small pink leaf here and there, which is absolutely beautiful, I picked a large bunch of them to put on the table. Mr Jones asked me if I could find out how much 50 pounds of butter would cost in Holland; if it isn’t too expensive he’s thinking about always having it sent from Holland. Ask Mrs Roos about it sometime, and write and tell me as soon as possible. The boys will also be coming soon. Have you ever read the story of Elijah and Elisha properly? I’ve been reading it again these last few days, and am enclosing what I’ve copied out. It’s so movingly beautiful. Similarly, I’ve also been reading in Acts about Paul, how he stood on the seashore, and they fell on his neck, and kissed him, and those words of Paul moved me, ‘God comforteth the simple’. It is God who makes men and who can enrich life with moments and times of higher life and loftier feeling. The sea may have made itself, or an oak tree itself, but men like Pa are purer than the sea. 
   The sea is beautiful all the same; there were lots of bedbugs at Mr Stokes’s, but that view from the school window made one forget them. The heart of a man of flesh and blood ‘sometimes faints from earnest longing’6 upon seeing those who devote themselves to and work for Him who baptized them, as it were, with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, and they – look, their eyes sometimes grow moist with tears of wistfulness as they think back on their young years and on ‘the good things with which He satisfied them’. Yet their exalted peace is better than the deceptive peace of bygone days. True rest and peace begin only ‘when there is nothing more in which to rest’9 and when there is ‘none upon earth they desire beside God’. Then there is a ‘woe is me’11 in them, and a beseeching ‘who shall deliver me from the body of this death’, and yet that is the best time of life, and blessed are they who reach that high peak. I’ve heard two men say that, one in Paris, the Rev. Bersier, who, out of fear of a great bodily suffering that awaited him, exclaimed during his sermon, ‘Who shall deliver me of this dead body’ in a tone of voice that I believe made everyone in the church tremble. And I heard Pa say it (when I was home in April, in his sermon), but he said it in a soft voice, though it had a keener edge than the other, and he followed it with (and his countenance was like that of an angel) ‘the blessed above, they say “what you are now, I used to be: what I am now, you will one day be”’.
   Between Pa and those above there is still a part of life, between us and Pa there is also still life. He above can make us Pa’s brothers and can also join us intimately to one another, more so every day, may it be so, for I have a need to remain your brother, old boy, surely you know how much I love you! May I succeed and get some firm ground beneath my feet. Yesterday I took a lovely walk along the Thames; on the other side there were splendid villas with their gardens. It was a sky like Ruisdael or Constable paint it. And now a handshake in thought, give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’. How is Willem15 doing? And give my regards to Borchers, too, if you happen to see him, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent. 
   The word of the Lord came unto Elijah the Tishbite, saying, Get thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there. He so went and did according unto the word of the Lord: for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook. And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up, because there had been no rain in the land. And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee. So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand. And she said, As the Lord thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse! and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thee and for thy son. For thus saith the Lord God of Israel, The barrel of 
   meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the Lord sendeth rain upon the earth. And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days. And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake to Elijah. And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in him. And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God! hast Thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this child’s soul come into him again. And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived. And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, See, thy son liveth. And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is truth. 
   And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father’s house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim. Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel’s table, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty. So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel. And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow Him: but if Baal is God, then follow him! And the people answered him not a word. Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord; but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men. Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no fire under: And call ye on the name of your Gods, and I will call on the name of the Lord: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.  And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name of your Gods, but put no fire under. And they took the bullock which 
   was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us! But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made. And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a God; but he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be awaked. And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them. And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded. And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that was broken down. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the Lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy name: And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the Lord: and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed. And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid him on the wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wood. And he said, Do it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time, so that the water ran round about the altar; and he filled the trench also with water. And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel! let it be known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word. Hear me, O Lord, hear me, that this people may know that Thou art the Lord God! and that thou hast turned their heart back again. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed 
   the burnt sacrifice, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is the God. And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them: and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and slew them there. And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink; for there is a sound as of abundance of rain. So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees, And said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times. And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man’s hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not. And it came to pass in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel. And the hand of the Lord was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel. And Elijah went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord! take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat. And he looked, and, behold, 
   there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of the Lord came again the second time, and again touched him, and said, Arise and eat! because the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of the meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks, going before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. 
 0  And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal. And Elijah said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Beth-el. And Elisha said unto him, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! So they went down to Beth-el. And the sons of the prophets that were at Beth-el came forth to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace. And Elijah said unto him, Elisha! tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee! So they came to Jericho. And the sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace. And Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here; for the Lord hath sent me to Jordan. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee. And they two went on. And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood to view afar off: and they two stood by Jordan. And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and thither, so that they two went over on dry ground. 
 1  And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. And he said, Thou hast asked a hard thing: nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not be so. And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father! my Father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And he saw him no more: and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces. He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of Jordan; and he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and thither: and Elisha went over. ‘And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of His grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I have coveted no man’s silver, or gold, or apparel. Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have shewed you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how He said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.’ And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled down, and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore, and fell on Paul’s neck, and kissed him, Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spake, that they should see his face no more.  Isleworth, 18 Aug. 1876 My dear Theo, Yesterday I went to see Gladwell, who’s home for a few days. Something very sad happened to his family: his sister, a girl full of life, with dark eyes and hair, 17 years old, fell from her horse while riding on Blackheath. She was unconscious when they picked her up, and died 5 hours later without regaining consciousness. I went there as soon as I heard what had happened and that Gladwell was at home. I left here yesterday morning at 11 o’clock, and had a long walk to Lewisham, the road went from one end of London to the other. At 5 o’clock I was at Gladwell’s. I’d gone to their gallery first, but it was closed. They had all just come back from the funeral, it was a real house of mourning and it did me good to be there. I had feelings of embarrassment and shame at seeing that deep, estimable grief, for these people are estimable. 
   Blessed are they that mourn, blessed are they that are ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, blessed are the pure in heart, for God comforts the simple. Blessed are they that find Love on their path, who are bound intimately with one another by God, for to them all things work together for good. I talked with Harry for a long time, until the evening, about all kinds of things, about the kingdom of God and about his Bible, and we walked up and down on the station, talking, and those moments before parting we’ll probably never forget. We know each other so well, his work was my work, the people he knows there I know too, his life was my life, and it was given to me to see so deeply into their family affairs, I think, because I believe that I love them, not so much because I know the particulars of those affairs, but because I feel the tone and feeling of their being and life. So we walked back and forth on that station, in that everyday world, but with a feeling 
   that was not everyday. They don’t last long, such moments, and we soon had to take leave of each other. It was a beautiful sight, looking out from the train over London, that lay there in the dark, St Paul’s11 and other churches in the distance. I stayed in the train until Richmond12 and walked along the Thames to Isleworth, that was a lovely walk, on the left the parks with their tall poplars, oaks and elms, on the right the river, reflecting the tall trees. It was a beautiful, almost solemn, evening; I got home at quarter past 10. Thanks for your last letter. You hadn’t yet written that Mrs Vintcent had died; how often I brought her home in the evenings. Do you still visit Borchers sometimes? How I’d like to have walked with you to Hoeven! I often teach the boys biblical history, and last Sunday I read the Bible with them. Mornings and evenings we all read the Bible and sing and pray, and that is good. We did that at Ramsgate, too, and when those 21 sons of the London markets and streets prayed ‘Our Father, who art in Heaven, give us this day our daily bread’, I’ve 
   sometimes thought of the cry of the young ravens that the Lord hears, and it did me good to pray with them and to bow my head, probably even lower than they did, at the words Do not lead us into temptation but deliver us from evil. I’m still full of yesterday; it must be good to be the brother of the man I saw so sorrowful yesterday, I mean that it must ‘be blessed to mourn’17 with manly sorrow, how I’d have liked to comfort the Father, but I was embarrassed, though I could talk to the son. There was something hallowed in that house yesterday. Have you ever read ‘A life for a life’, I think in Dutch it’s called ‘Uit het leven voor het leven’, by the woman who wrote John Halifax? You’d find it very beautiful. How’s your English coming along? It was a delight to take a long walk again, very little walking is done here at school. When I think of my life of struggle in Paris last year and now here, where sometimes I can’t leave the house for a whole day, or at least no further than the garden, then I sometimes think, when will I return to that world? If I do return to it, though, it will probably be some other kind of work than I did last year. But I think that I prefer doing biblical history with the boys to walking; one feels more or less safe doing the former. And now, regards to everyone at the Rooses’, and if anyone else should ask after me. How are the Van den Berghs, and the Van Stockums on Buitenhof? Do you ever hear anything from them? A handshake in thought and best wishes from Your most loving brother Vincent And herewith a letter for Mauve. You may read it, I believe it’s good not to forget one’s old acquaintances, that’s why I’m writing again to some of them, also those in Paris, to Soek and others. If you can persuade anyone to read Scenes from clerical life by Eliot, and Felix Holt, you’ll be doing a good deed. The former is a wonderful book. Recommend the former to Caroline and to the Mauves and, if possible, to Mr Tersteeg as well. Could you write by return of post saying whether a Dutch pound of butter costs 80 cents and – if it’s a different pound – what part of a kilo is it then? Also give my regards to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg and Betsy. I’m writing to you between school hours and rather in haste, as you can see. Isleworth, 26 Aug. 1876 My dear Theo, Herewith a few words for Mr Tersteeg. The last time I wrote to him I was still in Paris and it’s time I wrote again; we’ve always kept in touch with each other since I left The Hague. It’s a magnificent morning, the sun is shining through the large acacias on the playground, flashing on the roofs and windows visible behind the garden. There are already threads of gossamer in the garden, and it’s cool in the morning and the boys run back and forth to get warm. I hope to tell them the story of John and Theagenes2 this evening in their bedroom. I often tell them stories in the evening, such as Le conscrit by Conscience, and Madame Therèse by Erckmann-Chatrian4 and Oudejaar by Jean Paul, which is enclosed herewith, and Andersen’s fairy tales, ‘The story of a mother, The red shoes, The little matchseller’, King Robert of Sicily by Longfellow, etc. Sometimes something from Dutch history, too. Every day I teach them biblical history, and that is something more than a pleasure. Not a day goes by without praying to God and 
   without speaking of God, not only praying but also admitting to it, not only speaking but also holding fast to prayer, Father I pray not that Thou shouldest take me out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep me from the evil. ‘O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our Love for Thee make that bond ever stronger’. My speaking of Him is nothing much as yet, but with God’s help and blessing it will get better. I have confidence10 nowadays, but there is greater confidence than this, and greater Love and greater strength to act and to do what is right, a greater yielding to a stronger urge, a better and more profound searching for God and doing His will with a simpler, better and humbler heart, and that’s what I hope for. Have I ever told you about that painting by Boughton, ‘The pilgrim’s progress’? It’s getting on towards evening. A sandy road leads over the hills to a mountain on which one sees the holy city lit by the sun setting red behind the grey clouds of evening. On the road a pilgrim who wants to go to that city, he is already tired and asks a woman in black standing by the roadside whose name is ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, ‘Does the road go uphill then all the way?’ ‘Yes to the very end’ ‘And will the journey take all day long?’ ‘From morn till night my friend’.
   The landscape the road goes through is so beautiful, brown heathland with birches and pine trees here and there, and patches of yellow sand, and mountains in the distance, against the sun. Actually, it’s not a painting but an inspiration. I’m writing to you between lessons; today I escaped briefly and walked between the hedgerows with ‘John and Theagenes’ in order to memorize it. How I wish you could see the playground now, and the garden behind it, in the twilight, inside the school the gas-lamps flicker and one hears the congenial sound of the boys learning their lessons, from time to time one of them starts humming a snatch of melody from some hymn or other, and there’s something of that ‘faith of old’15 in me. I’m still a long way from being what I’d like to be, but with God’s help I’ll succeed. What do I want – – – to be bound to Christ with unbreakable bonds and to feel those bonds. To be sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. To live in and for Christ, to be one of the poor in His kingdom, leavened with the leaven, inspired by His Spirit, constrained by His Love, resting in the Father with that rest of which I spoke in my last letter. To become one who cannot rest in anything but in Him, who desires nothing on earth beside Him, and who lives in the Love of God and of Christ, in whom we are intimately bound with one another. 
   Gal. IV:6. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father! Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity suffereth long, it is meek, it is woe-spirited, it has woe and spirit, charity is kind; Charity envieth not; Charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. And now abideth faith, hope, Charity; but the greatest of these is Charity. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. May you also have a pleasant evening, may it be so. Thanks for your postcard. Mr Jones hasn’t yet decided what he will do. Give my regards to all who ask after me, in any case Borchers if you see him or any of his family. A handshake in thought from Your most loving brother, Vincent 
   Just a few more words. I just told the story of John and Theagenes – first in the room where most of the boys sleep and then in the room upstairs where there are 4 others – in the dark, but when I’d finished they had all fallen asleep unnoticed. It’s no wonder, because they ran around a lot today in the playground. Then, too, I speak with some difficulty and I don’t know what it sounds like to English ears. But I’ll learn by practice. I think that the Lord has received me24 just as I am, with all my shortcomings, although there’s an even deeper kind of receiving for which I hope. It’s already late. Tomorrow evening I have to tell the same story to the assistant teacher and the two oldest boys, who stay up later. Those three and I eat our bread together in the evenings. When I was telling the story, 
   I heard one of them playing ‘Tell me the old, old story’ on the piano downstairs. It’s already late, and school rules don’t really allow me to stay up this long. Just now I smoked my pipe in the playground, it was so beautiful outside, even in the small yard where the pig lives for most of the year, though it’s not there at the moment. It’s nice to walk around like that everywhere in the evening, upstairs and downstairs. And now good-night and sleep well, and when you say your evening prayers, remember me as I do you. Good-night, old boy, a handshake in thought from Your most loving brother Vincent 
   I’m already looking forward to Christmas, two years ago we took that walk in the snow in the evening, do you remember it, when we saw the moon rise above Mariënhof? I still remember very well that evening at Christmas-time when I rode from Den Bosch27 to Helvoirt in an open cart, it was awfully cold and the road was slippery, how beautiful Den Bosch looked, the marketplace and the streets with snow and the houses dark, with snow on the roofs; Brabant is indeed Brabant, and the Mother country is indeed the mother country, and the lands where one is a stranger are the lands where one is a stranger. And how friendly Helvoirt looked that evening, and the lights in the village and the tower between the snow-covered poplars, seen from a distance on the road to Den Bosch. But it’s love that gives everything such great beauty and life. And do you still remember that trip to Sint-Michielsgestel? 
   And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with great singing and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not. Thus saith the Lord; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord; and they shall come again from the foreign land. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are my ways your ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts higher than your thoughts. When Lies came home at Christmas we had such a nice reunion. She and Albertien35 came from Breda36 in Uncle Vincent’s carriage. Pa, Cor and I walked up the road to meet them, and when we saw the carriage in the distance I walked on ahead. It was twilight, and dark in the carriage. Through the window one saw the road with rows of trees on either side, and the fields. At the end of the road the church, dark against the sky. Behind the church the large, dark evening clouds, dark but with silver edges. And it was so unexpectedly good for me to see the girl again; it was a much greater joy than I thought it would be. Anna should be back in Welwyn by now, when she leaves Welwyn she’ll feel how much she loved it. You remember how in the winter she was the first to get up and make the fire. She’s been a blessing for that household. Her little room is so pretty, with the ivy 
 0  around the window and the view of the garden and the huge chestnut trees, which masses of swallows fly around in the summer when the sun goes down behind the trees. And the rooks have their nests there. The Mater Dolorosa by Delaroche38 was hanging above her bed. Do you perhaps still have that page from Michelet that begins ‘from here I see a lady’? If you do, copy it for me if you will, I need it but don’t have the book any more. A torrent of unrightousness Has got the mastery of me Oh my unbridled sinfulness Thou dost atone in harmony! Blest is he whom Thou hast chosen From all earthly woe set free Coming nigh, for Thou hast spoken To find his dwelling-place in Thee. Blest is the man whose sins have been forgiven Saved from punition in the sight of heaven The transgression leading to his blight Is hidden from the Lord’s most holy sight. Blest is the man to whom it is allowed To be judged blameless by a righteous God And nurtures in his heart sincere and pious Pure probity and no base wickedness. How shall these things be? Who shall roll us away the stone from the sepulchre? 
 1  I will go forth before thee, and make the crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. I am the First and the Last. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget Thee. Hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine: Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee. The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, 
 2  and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended. As one whom his Mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, saith the Lord. From this time thou shalt cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my youth. Thou shalt call me, My Father; and shalt not turn away from me. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. For I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save thee, even if all thy lovers have forgotten thee. I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds. The Lord hath appeared of old unto me, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting Love. As one whom his Mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, saith the Lord. There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. There is no safer or better way to get through life than Love, above all for our Father, in whose name we go forward from one day to the next, though we can feel love for others as well. How often has the memory of one who is already departed to our Father’s house where there are many mansions61 warmed me and made my heart glow with Love in the streets of London and on my evening walks in the cabbage fields outside the city. And still the thought of Him recurs and Love of Him, as often as I walk the streets of London. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of this morning. There are hours and days and times in life when God hides His face, as it were, but for those who love God even those times, those sorrowful times, are not entirely without God, but as though full of prophecies for the future and full of voices from the past: ‘hitherto hath the Lord brought you’, ‘foster again the faith of old’. If things should sometimes happen to you that you hadn’t counted on, strengthen within yourself the godly sorrow4 and the voice: ‘Abba, Father’. It was an autumn day and I stood on the front steps of Mr Provily’s school, watching the carriage drive away that Pa and Ma rode home in. One could see that yellow carriage in the distance on the long road – wet after the rain, with thin trees on either side – running through the meadows. The grey sky above it all was reflected in the puddles. And around a fortnight later I was standing one evening in a corner of the playground when they came to tell me that someone was asking after me, and I knew who it was and a moment later I flung my arms round Father’s neck. What I felt, wouldn’t it have been ‘because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying in us, “Abba, Father”’? It was a moment in which we both felt that we have a Father in heaven; because my Father, too, looked up and in his heart there was an even bigger voice than mine crying ‘Abba, Father’.
   Between that moment and today are years of pilgrimage. There are words that accompany us and grow up with us, as it were – which are, ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’. There is the prayer of a Mother for her children which is very powerful, for the prayer of a righteous person availeth much. Father, I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil. There is the hand of a faithful Father that blessed us when we left the family home. And then, old boy, as I said earlier, there is a strong yearning for the day when He will no longer remember the iniquities of our youth. Who rejoices in grey hair? As far as the east is from the west, so far do I remove your transgressions from you. Though your sins be as scarlet, I shall make them white as snow. He who hate not his own life, he cannot be Christ’s disciple. Pa once sent me this: A longing for sanctification16 Who shall free us fully and for ever From the body of this death, bent beneath the yoke? How long must I still combat my nature Ere this heart from sinful service be revoked? That God my God would be, I pledged my troth With singleness of mind Him would I follow But I was tried – forgotten was my oath I was tempted – and my foot did falter. No, with my own strength I shan’t learn to conquer Soul, confess your weakness, self-deceit, take flight! A child’s heart must be shaped by the Father The Master be the pupil’s guiding light. Well then, Father, let your love be my teacher My Master, take my hand, and show your standard I stood alone – and fell: now we’re together I succumbed, but win behind your vanguard. Only now do I feel strong, when with weakness stricken Powerless in myself, but in the Lord, almighty! Sin may tempt, the evil passions quicken, Thou castest down all foes, O God in me! I am grieved, but it’s a godly sadness A night-cloud – tinged all round with dawn’s bright crimson I weep, Lord, though my heart is full of gladness I bow my head – but, Father, in thy bosom. Who rejoices in grey hair? Who sees behind it as Felix Holt saw behind the word ‘failure’? Who sees, when the first life, the life of childhood and adolescence, that life of joy in the world and vanity reluctantly withers, and it will wither, even as the blossom falls from the trees, that then another life shoots up vigorously, the life of the love of Christ that constraineth18 and godly sorrow not to be repented of;19 how then, in our profound dependence on God, and in the clear and forceful feeling of this, we find more favour in His eyes, which are too pure to behold evil, and how He will entrust to us more safely, in our weakness, His Holy Spirit which giveth life22 and constraineth unto good works. Who rejoices in the life ahead? Who rejoices in grey hair, who rejoices in sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing, chastened, but not killed until ‘dying, and, behold, we live’? Who rejoices in falling down, and standing up again with longsuffering and meekness? Who rejoices in the green of the pine trees and cedar and ivy and holly and moss in the winter? Dry wood gives more heat, bright fire and light when it is lit than green wood does. There is no fear in Love, but perfect love shutteth out fear. Father in my great affliction, Father, who punishes and saves, Father, e’en in death’s own kingdom, Father, too, in the silent grave. Where’er I see inconstancy, God, Thou takest a firm stand. My dust, too, rests in Thy loyalty And slumbers in Thy fatherly hand. Years, go quickly, fly by swiftly With your gladness and travail Whatever evil I bewail God, my God, He changeth not. Though we sit in mournful darkness That eternal light will blaze All its glory and resplendence Worthy of all laud and praise. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Why art thou cast down, my soul, Disquieted in me, oh why? Foster again the faith of old, Rejoice in praising Him most high. Oft hath He taken your distress And turned it into happiness. Hope in Him, eyes heavenward raised, For to my God I still give praise. And above all things have fervent charity among yourselves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins. The good Lord blesses love’s dwelling-place, He dwelleth there, there one obtains His grace, and life everlasting. Let us have Love toward one another, so that God may increase and strengthen our Love, and let us have love toward those around us, and if sometimes there are no people whom you can love enough, love the town you live in, as you certainly do, don’t I love Paris and London even though I’m a child of the pine-woods and of that beach at Ramsgate? And seek to please the poor, and to find favour in their eyes. ‘Stablish your heart’. ‘Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying in us, “Abba, Father”’. He that hath not loved knoweth not God; for God is Love. And this is life eternal, to know God, and Christ, Whom He hath sent. There is no fear in love. In my Father’s house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. And yet I am not alone, but the Father is with me. It is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to fall into the hand of the Lord than into the hand of man. Let Christ be the centre of your longing, the Comforter of a troubled mind. ‘Stablish your heart’47 in this sense, too: eat your bread with singleness of heart, I do so at least, I cannot do otherwise, God help me, if there be any danger in doing it; ‘Father, into thy hands I commend my heart’, eat your bread but live simply, and smoke your pipe, I do it too, whenever I have some tobacco and take a walk, I do it too whenever I get the chance to break loose. ‘And commit thy way unto the Lord; He shall bring it to pass’.
   ‘Stablish your Love’. What exactly is the Love of which Paul speaks? What exactly are those wonderful words which you also know, 1 Cor. XIII. That Love is the life in Christ, that love is our Mother, all the goodness of the earth belongs to her, for everything is good if enjoyed with thanksgiving, but she extends much further than that goodness of the earth. To her belongs a drink from the brook during a walk or from a fountain in the hot streets of London and Paris, to her also belongs ‘I shall make your bed in sickness’, ‘as one whom his Mother comforteth, so will I comfort you’, to her also belongs faithfulness until death in Christ who gives us the strength to do all things. There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. ‘Stablish your hope’, for there is much that is good in life, for him who loves Christ the world is what it is, and all things shall be added unto him, as it were. It is indeed true that much joy already lies behind us, and also much that we used to look forward to, and although much joy may lie in store for us, we have already seen that ‘the world passeth away, and all the glory thereof’. And if it be true that: I’ve found a joy in sorrow, a secret balm for pain, A beautiful tomorrow of sunshine after rain; I’ve found a branch of healing near every bitter spring, A whispered promise stealing o’er every broken string. then it’s also true that there is no joy without insufficiency. Sorrow is better than joy, and it is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasts, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. Even in mirth the heart is sad. For myself I shall endeavour to strive to love Christ and to work for Him in my life, even if it fails and even if I fall, there will always remain a standing aloof64 and a longing for above from the misery below. But I want to seek faith and Love and to continue asking for God’s spirit under all circumstances. Now this is my vow to the Lord my God, my rock. If I am forsaken, then I am forsaken, but He is faithful and loves with an eternal Love and grants us our heart’s desire of being Evergreen. 
   Read the prophecies of Isaiah and Jeremiah, Isa. 9, 11, 35; Isa. 40, 42, 43, 44, 45:2 and the following verses, 49, 53, 55, 58, 61, 63, 65;67 Jer. 3, 17, 30, 31. The Lord is thy keeper, The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. Unto Him belong the issues from death, with Him is everlasting life. My boy, days will come when we’ll no longer believe because we heard it said but when we’ll know, feel and love it. Then we’ll be moved71 to hear the name of God spoken, just as we’re moved to see our father again after a long time away from home. And we’ll be brothers and sisters and children of the parsonage, as though made new, and in manifold ways. Let us continue in life as long as our legs will carry us, even though our feet grow tired, and the oppression great, and even if our ears buzz with the sound of the world that they have been hearing for so many years, and even if our whole head is tired, and the going is difficult, let us continue in life because our Father and our Mother tell us to ‘go forth and don’t look back’, and if we can do good along the way, let us not neglect to do so; and yet it is more our heart than our work that God desires. Pa and Ma say ‘go forth’ and they love us, didn’t Pa say: my boy, surely you know that I would give my last shirt for you. Let us continue as long as our legs will carry us (and you will find that God giveth power to the faint; and increaseth strength to him that has no might, that God supports) for there is greater Love in store, that is why we rejoice and have faith in that life ahead. A handshake in thought, it’s already late, adieu. Your most loving brother, Vincent Now, Brother, these are the fruits of my pen and the fruits of my heart. My eyes, O weep no more, but hold back your tears My soul, grieve no more, but pray, but pray, my soul. Do you ever go to the Lord’s Supper? They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. (Try and send that page from Michelet.)77 Don’t be afraid, when you’re out walking in the evening and there’s no one near by, to sing a psalm: ‘The panting hart, the hunt escapèd’, or ‘O why art thou cast down, my soul?’79 or ‘Centre of our longing’80 or ‘I know in Whom my faith is founded’. The years between 20 and 30 are full of all sorts of dangers, full of great danger, yea, the danger of sin and death, but also full of light and God’s comfort. Wrestling, you will emerge victorious, and when they’re over you’ll think back on them with nostalgia and say, it was a good time after all. Regards to everyone at the Rooses’, Haanebeeks’, Tersteegs’, Borchers’, Caroline83 and Mauve. If you can, send a Carte de visite to Ma on her birthday, No. 669, The prodigal son by Scheffer. My dear Theo, Van Iterson just came and surprised me, I think it’s nice that he came, but it’s as though he were a person from another world, so much lies between the time when we were in the firm together and now. Herewith the ‘Wijde wijde wereld’1 and another little book, give one of them to Caroline. How much I’d like you to be able to see it here. I hope to walk to London on Saturday morning at 4 o’clock to visit Gladwell4 and others. I wish you could walk along with me. A hearty handshake in thought. Adieu, believe me, Your most loving brother Vincent Isleworth, 3 October 1876. Sometimes hearts that are drooping Grow full to the o’erflowing And they that behold it Do wonder and know not That God at their fountains Far off has been raining. Dear Theo, I heard from home that you were ill. How much I’d like to be with you, my boy. Yesterday evening I walked over to Richmond and I thought about you the whole way, it was a beautiful, grey evening, you know that I go there every Monday evening to the Methodist church, yesterday evening I even said a few words on ‘Nothing pleaseth me but in Jesus Christ, and in Him all things please me’. How I’d like to be with you, though, oh why are we all so far apart? But what shall we do about it? I’m sending herewith a letter from the aunts at Zundert. You know that Aunt Bet hurt herself so badly. I wrote and told them that, if possible, you and I would walk to Zundert sometime at Christmas. Herewith I’m copying out a few psalms, you might like to read them at this time. Write a few words soon if you can. A week ago on Saturday I made a long journey to London, and there I heard about a situation that might be of future interest. The clergymen in such seaside places as Liverpool and Hull, for example, often have need of assistants who speak various languages to work among the seamen and foreigners, and also to visit the sick. In addition, such a situation would be salaried. I left here early that morning, 4 o’clock, that night it was beautiful in the park here, with the dark avenues of elm trees and the wet road going through them and the grey rainy sky above it all, and there was a thunderstorm in the distance. When daylight came I was in Hyde Park, where the leaves were already falling from the trees and the Virginia creeper was so magnificently red against the houses, and it was foggy. At 7 o’clock I was in Kennington, and rested there 
   awhile in the church I had attended many a Sunday evening. In London I visited one or two people and also went to the gallery of Messrs Goupil & Cie, and there I saw the drawings that Van Iterson had brought, and it was a pleasure to see the Dutch cities and meadows again. That painting by Artz, that mill on the canal, I find really very beautiful. You also have a good life ahead of you, Theo, remain steadfast, and much light will come your way. Is Van Iterson back yet? I was very glad indeed to see him again, he’s bringing you ‘De wijde wijde wereld’, read it one of these days, the first chapters in particular are so beautiful and so truly straightforward. And read Longfellow sometime, e.g.: I see the lights of the village Gleam through the rain and the mist And a feeling of sadness comes o’er me That my soul cannot resist A feeling of sadness and longing That is not akin to pain And resembles sorrow only As the mist resembles the rain Come read to me some poem Some simple and heartfelt lay That shall soothe this restless feeling And banish the thoughts of day. Not from the grand old masters Not from the bards sublime Whose distant footsteps echo Through the corridors of time Read from some humbler poet, Whose songs gushed from his heart As showers from the clouds of summer Or tears from the eyelids start. Who through long days of labour And nights devoid of ease, Still heard in his soul the music Of wonderful melodies Such songs have power to quiet The restless pulse of care And come like the benediction That follows after prayer. Why art thou cast down, my soul, Disquieted in me, oh why? Foster again the faith of old, Rejoice in praising Him most high. Oft hath he taken your distress And turned it into happiness. Hope in Him, eyes heavenward raised, For to my God I still give praise. If Van Iterson gave you that English hymnal, read No. 14. And now, old boy, a handshake in thought to you and one to Uncle Jan, adieu, old boy, remain steadfast and get well soon, and write soon about how you’re doing and at the same time send back the aunts’ letter, poor Aunt Bet, what old friends we are. Oh that Zundert, the thought of it’s almost too much at times. Adieu, old boy, may God make us brothers more and more and join us intimately to one another, and may the Love for Him make that bond ever stronger. Give my very warm regards to Uncle Jan, I heard from Pa that Willem and Johan15 are doing very well indeed. Give my regards, too, to everyone at the Rooses’, from Your most loving brother, Vincent. Paris will also be beautiful now in the autumn, last year Gladwell and I went every Sunday to as many friends and churches as we could, we left in the morning and came home late. Notre-Dame is so absolutely beautiful in the autumn evenings among the chestnut trees. There’s something in Paris, though, that’s more beautiful than the autumn and the churches, and that is the poor people there. I sometimes think of many a person there. 
   Psalm 23 The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name’s sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me: Thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: And I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Psalm 91 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust. Surely He shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with His wings, and under His wings shalt thou trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Because Thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, Thy habitation; There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For He shall give his angels charge to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet. Because he hath set his love upon Me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known My name. He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him. With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation. 
   Psalm 121 I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my help. My help cometh from the Lord, which made Heaven and earth. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee will not slumber. Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore. A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not. Thus saith the Lord; Refrain thine eyes from tears, and thy voice from weeping, for thy work shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the land of the enemy. But this shall be the covenant that I will make, saith the Lord, I will write my law in their inward parts, and will be their God, and they shall be My sons and daughters. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Father in my great affliction, Father, who punishes and saves, Father, e’en in death’s own kingdom, Father, too, in the silent grave. Where’er I see inconstancy, God, Thou takest a firm stand. My dust, too, rests in Thy loyalty And slumbers in Thy fatherly hand. Though catastrophes come hither, Refuge I shall find in thee. Thou art in Thy Son my Father, Constant shalt Thou ever be. The light of stars. The night is come but not too soon; And sinking silently, All silently the little moon Drops down beneath the sky. There is no light in heaven and earth But the cold light of stars; And the first watch of night is given To the red planet Mars. Is it the tender star of love? The star of love and dreams? Oh no, from that blue tent above, A hero’s armour gleams And earnest thoughts within me rise, When I behold afar, Suspended in the evening skies, The shield of that red star O star of strength, I see thee stand And smile upon my pain Thou beckonest with thy mailed hand And I am strong again Within my breast there is no light, But the cold light of stars; I give the first watch of the night To the red planet Mars. The star of the unconquered will, He rises in my breast Serene and resolute and still, And calm and selfpossessed. And thou, too, whosoe’er thou art That readest this brief psalm As one by one thy hopes depart Be resolute and calm. O fear not in a world like this And thou shalt know ’ere long Know how sublime a thing it is To suffer and be strong. The panting hart, the hunt escapèd, Cries no harder for the pleasure Of fresh flowing streams of water Than my soul doth long for God. Yea, my soul thirsts for the Lord, God of life, oh when shall I Approach Thy sight and drawing nigh, Give Thee praise in Thine own house. Do read Isaiah 53. Isleworth, 7 Oct. 1876. Dear Theo, It’s Saturday again, and I’m writing a few words once more. I’m longing so much to see you again, oh, I can long for it so much sometimes. Do write soon and tell me how you are. Last Wednesday afternoon we took a lovely walk to a village an hour away from here. The road there goes through meadows and fields, along hedgerows of hawthorn full of blackberries and clematis and here and there a tall elm tree. It was so beautiful when the sun went down behind the grey clouds and when the shadows were long, and we chanced to meet Mr Stokes’s school, where there are still several boys I know. The clouds kept their red glow long after the sun had set and the twilight was gathering over the fields, and in the distance we saw the street-lamps being lit in the village. This morning there was also a beautiful sunrise. I see it every morning when I wake the boys up. Last night I opened that book by Souvestre again (Le philosophe sous les toits), and I found such a friendly description of Paris in it, a kind description; I copied it out for Pa and Ma, perhaps you’ll like it too: 9 May. The beautiful evenings have returned; the trees are beginning to uncurl their buds. Hyacinths, daffodils, violets and lilacs scent the flower-sellers’ stalls; the crowds have begun to stroll along the quays and boulevards again. After supper, I too came down from my garret to breathe the evening air. 
   It is the hour when Paris shows herself in all her beauty. During the day, the plaster of the facades fatigues the eye with its monotonous whiteness, the heavily laden carts make the cobblestones shudder under their huge wheels, the hurrying crowds cross and collide, intent on not missing a moment of business; there is something harsh, anxious, breathless about the city. But everything changes the moment the stars come out; the white houses fade into misty shadow; nothing is to be heard but the wheels of carriages as they bowl along on their way to some party or other; nothing is to be seen but people strolling idly or gaily by; work gives way to leisure. Now everyone draws breath from that fierce race through the day’s activities; what strength remains is given over to pleasure! See the dance-halls lighting up their colonnades, the theatres opening, the tit-bit stalls lining the avenues, the newsvendors making their lanterns shine. Paris has clearly put aside the pen, the ruler and the apron; after the day dedicated to work it wants to keep the evening for enjoyment; like the masters of Thebes it has put off serious business till the morrow. I love to share this festive time — not to take part in the general gaiety but to observe it. The joy of others may embitter jealous hearts, but it fortifies submissive hearts; it is the ray of sunshine that opens up those two lovely flowers called ‘confidence’ and ‘hope’. Usually, the view that opens before my window delights me. It is a clutter of roofs whose tops overlap and criss-cross, superimposed on one another, and upon which the tall chimneys raise their peaks. Yesterday I still found something Alpine about them, and waited for the first snow, to see glaciers on them; today I see nothing but tiles and stovepipes. The pigeons that fed my rustic fantasies now seem no more than poor feathered creatures that have taken the roofs for a farmyard; the smoke that rises in faint wisps, instead of giving me dreams of the vent-holes of Vesuvius makes me think of cooking and dish-water; lastly, the telegraph that I can see from afar, on the old tower of Montmartre, looks to me like a revolting gallows whose arm rises above the city. In sorrow did I bow my head There is no peace on earth I said The world is strong And mocks the song Of ‘peace on earth, Goodwill to men’! Then pealed the bells more loud and deep: ‘God is not dead! nor doth He sleep! What’s wrong shall fail What’s right prevail With peace on earth, goodwill to men.’4 There’s still a lot to do here for many to whom God gives His blessing and whose lives He spares. While I was writing to you I was summoned to Mr Jones, who asked if I felt like walking to London for him to collect some money. And when I returned in the evening, happily there was a letter from Pa with news of you! How I’d like to be with you, with Pa and with you, old boy. And thank God you’re a little better, even though you’re still weak. And you’ll be longing to see Ma too, and now that I hear you’re going home with Ma it makes me think of a passage in Conscience: I have been ill. My spirit was weary, my soul disenchanted, my body sickly. I, whom God has at least endowed with moral energy and a vast instinct for affection, was falling into the depths of the bitterest discouragement, and I felt with terror a deadly poison creeping into my shrivelled heart. I have spent three months on the heath: you know, that lovely region where the soul returns to itself and enjoys sweet repose; where everything exudes peace and tranquillity; where the soul, in the presence of God’s immaculate creation, shakes off the yoke of convention, forgets society and frees itself from its bonds with the vigour of returning youth; where every thought takes on the form of prayer; where the heart is emptied of everything that is not in harmony with the freshness and freedom of nature. Oh, there the weary soul finds calm; there, the exhausted man regains a youthful strength. Thus were my days of sickness spent, days of ineffable joy for my soul: smiling at the sun when, in all its majesty, it casts its first rays over the horizon; watching the countryside awaken and catching the first notes of the glorious hymn it addresses to heaven; roaming heaths and forests; questioning my soul — and thinking — scrutinizing and admiring the life of plants and animals, taking deep breaths of the pure air, stopping, going on, turning back, and talking out loud in the solitude; dreaming of splendid things: of God, of the future, of our dear Flanders, of peace and love. And in the evening! To sit under the wide chimney-piece, feet in the ashes, eyes fixed upon a star that sends me its light from on high through the chimney-top, as if calling out to me; or, sunk in a vague reverie, to look at the fire, watching the flames come to life, grow, gasp and crackle, pushing each other aside as if vying to lick the cooking-pot with their tongues of fire — and to imagine that this is human life: to be born, to work, to love, to grow up, and to die Up above, smoke crowns the chimney with its weightless plume; of all that noise, that crackling, that heat, nothing more comes forth. Mr Jones has promised me that I won’t have to teach so much any more, but that I may work in his parish from now on, visiting people, talking to them, and so on. May God give this His blessing. Father, I pray that Thou dost not take me out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep me from the evil.
   Now I’ll tell you about my walk to London. I left here at noon and arrived where I had to be between 5 and 6 o’clock and posted the letter to Pa and Ma along the way. When I came to the neighbourhood in the city where most of the galleries are, in the neighbourhood of the Strand, I met a lot of acquaintances; it was right at lunch-time and so there were a lot of people on the street, coming from or going to their offices. First of all, I met a young clergyman who used to preach here and with whom I became acquainted at that time, then Mr Wallis’s clerk and then one of the Messrs Wallis himself, in those days I went to their house once or twice – he already has two children9 – and then I ran into Mr Reid10 and Mr Richardson, who are old friends by now. Last year at this time Mr Richardson was in Paris, and we walked together to Père Lachaise. Afterwards I went to see Van Wisselingh, where I saw sketches for two church windows. In the middle of one of the windows the portrait of an elderly lady, such a noble face, with the words ‘Thy will be done’14 inscribed above; in the other window the portrait of her daughter, with the words ‘Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen’. There, as well as in the gallery of Messrs G.&Cie, I saw beautiful paintings and drawings, it’s such a deep pleasure to be reminded time and again of Holland through art. In the City17 I also went to see Mr Gladwell18 and to St Paul’s. And from the City to the other end of London, there I visited a boy who had left Mr Stokes’s school because of illness, and I found him completely recovered, outside in the street. Then on to the place where I had to collect the money for Mr Jones. The suburbs of London have a peculiar beauty; between the small houses and gardens there are open places covered with grass and usually with a church or school or poorhouse between the trees and shrubbery in the middle, and it can be so beautiful there when the sun goes down red in the light evening mist. It was like that yesterday evening, and later I did so wish that you had seen the streets of London when it began to grow dark and the street-lamps were lit and everyone was going home, it was obvious from everything that it was Saturday evening, and in all that hustle and bustle there was peace, one felt, as it were, the need for and joy at the approach of Sunday. Oh those Sundays and how much is done and striven for on those Sundays, it’s such a relief to those poor neighbourhoods and busy streets. It was dark in the City, but it was a lovely walk past all those churches along the way. Close to the Strand I found an omnibus that brought me a long way, it was already rather late. I rode past Mr Jones’s little church19 and saw another in the distance where light was still burning so late. I headed for it and found it to be a very beautiful little Roman Catholic church20 in which a couple of women were praying. Then I came to that dark park I already wrote to you about, and from there I saw in the distance the lights of Isleworth and the church with the ivy and the cemetery with the weeping willows on the banks of the Thames. 
   Now then, Theo, get well soon and read this letter sometime when Ma is sitting with you, because I’d very much like to be with you both in thought. I’m really very glad that Mr Jones has promised to let me work in his parish, and that I’ll eventually find the right thing. We must seek that, but God must help and that He does, there is no life that He cannot sanctify and inspire. May I also discover ‘that this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ came into the world to save sinners’, being useful and of some value. I long so much to see you sometimes. A hearty handshake to you, and give Ma your hand for me when she’s sitting with you. Adieu. Your most loving brother, Vincent Adieu. May God grant that I find grace in the eyes of my Father and Mother and in the eyes of those who will come after me. And now, my boy, another word to you. He who puts himself in a Christian sphere, and seeks and does Christian work as best he can, he will soon feel that he is on a path that he must traverse whether he wants to or not, and will cry out in anguish, God help me, I can do nothing else, and God hears this cry and God is a more powerful help in life than all human and worldly help. 
   Psalm 107 O Give thanks unto the Lord, for His mercy endureth forever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom He hath redeemed. They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and He delivered them out of their distresses. And He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation. He brought them out of darkness, and brake their bands in sunder. For He hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron in sunder. He sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions. They that go down to the sea in ships, these see the great works of the Lord, and His wonders in the deep. For He commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. They mount up to the Heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wit’s end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and He bringeth them out of their distresses. He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be quiet; so He bringeth them unto their desired haven. He setteth the poor on high. The righteous shall see it, and rejoice. Man proposes, but God disposes. Protect me O God, for my bark is so small and Thy sea is so great. Only they that brave its dangers know the secret of the sea, understand its mystery. I hope to receive tomorrow, for the second time, some money for my new work, and to buy a pair of new boots and a new hat with it. And then, God willing, we shall ‘rise up once again’. Many regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and to everyone I know, especially everyone at Mr Tersteeg’s and at the Van Stockums’ and the Haanebeeks’.  Tell Ma that it was such a delight, after that journey to London, to put on a pair of socks that she’d knitted. In the streets of London they’re selling sweet violets everywhere; they flower here twice a year. I bought some for Mrs Jones to make up for the pipe I smoke here now and then, mostly late in the evening in the playground. The tobacco here is rather strong, though. My dear Theo, I was so grateful for your short letter and for what Ma wrote, so we’ll wait until Christmas, and then may God let us see one another again in peace. ‘My illness is not a bad thing’. No, for Sorrow is better than laughter. No, being ill and supported by God’s arm, and acquiring new ideas and resolutions during the days of one’s illness, which couldn’t occur to us when we weren’t ill, and acquiring clearer faith and firmer trust during those days, that’s not a bad thing. We worship and are silent. Living in the world must become a matter of giving to the world that which is of the world, while Religion, striving to do God’s will, must become the main concern. Religion – doing God’s will, being a Christian – what is that? Let us seek it, and may God spare our lives, and godly sorrow6 shall not be fruitless. Its work is wrought invisibly, yet powerfully. ‘This shall be the covenant that I will make with them; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put My law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be My people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all know Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. Thus saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The Lord of hosts is His name.’8
   Must living in the world become a matter of giving to the world that which is of the world? Yes, but that living in the world means being ‘chastened, but not killed’, oh, there may be beautiful, rich days in all phases of one’s life, if the love of Christ constrains us. How well Eliot11 can describe them. Life in the world is chastened but not killed, go back into it like a child. These are beautiful words: ‘be ye therefore harmless as doves and wise as serpents’. Behold, all things are become new. I heard the Rev. Bersier14 say that when he was faced with a period of suffering and difficulties in which one says: ‘All these things are against us’. ‘All things are become new’, he said with emotion, as though he saw through everything. These are beautiful words: ‘Nothing pleaseth me but in Jesus Christ, and in Him all things please me’, ‘though even in mirth the heart be sad’. ‘My illness is not a bad thing’, no, for man’s extremity is God’s opportunity. When we are weak, we are strong. Being ill sanctifies being well and teaches one to be well. Father, we pray that Thou dost not take us out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep us from the evil.  Just get well soon, old chap, oh, how I long for Christmas. Herewith Anna’s last letter, she’ll probably think of Welwyn often once she has left it, everything is so beautiful there. 
   Yesterday I was in Mr Jones’s church to help get everything ready for this evening. A vicar from Leicester will be giving a lecture on the Reformation and illustrating it with a magic lantern showing scenes from that period. I’ve already seen some of the plates, they’re in the manner of Holbein. You know that many painters and draughtsmen here work in his manner. There was a very beautiful plate of Luther’s marriage. Last Monday there was a ‘tea-meeting’ at that church, it had been one year since the church was opened. There were at least 250 people at the reception, and afterwards Mr Jones and several other preachers spoke until late in the evening. But again, old boy, who would be able to collect his thoughts at all if the feeling of duty did not join everything together? Who would be able to maintain some earnestness without childlike faith:25 we are travellers, strangers – forget those things which are behind, and reach forth unto those things which are before!26 It is also good to believe that an angel stands behind each one of us, it is good to feel in our hearts the cry, Abba, Father!27 It’s lovely here now, especially in the streets in the evening, when it’s a bit foggy and the street-lamps are lit, and also in that park I wrote to you about, I saw the sun setting there a couple of days ago, behind the elm trees whose leaves are now the colour of bronze. That haze which Anna writes about29 lay over the grass, and a brook runs through that park in which one sees the swans swimming. 
   The acacias in the playground have already lost many of their leaves, one sees them through the window in front of my reading-desk, sometimes they stand out dark against the sky, sometimes one sees the sun behind them, rising up red in the mist. It will surely be winter soon, how fortunate that Christmas is in the winter, that’s why I like winter better than any other season, Christmas and New Year’s Eve are even better than the autumn. How wonderful it will be to sail down the Thames and across the sea, and then those friendly Dutch dunes and that small tower that one already sees from a great distance. How little we see of each other, old boy, and how little we see of our parents, and yet the feeling of our origins and of one another is so strong that the heart is at times uplifted and our eyes look to God, beseeching, Let me not stray too far from them, not for too long, O Lord! Must man not struggle here on earth? You must have felt so when you were ill. No victory without a battle, no battle without suffering. Many battles must be fought Much of life with suffering fraught Many prayers must needs be said For a blissful end to lie ahead. Let me not stray too far from them, from Thy people, O Lord. Thou which art their God, be Thou also mine God, then we will be united in Thee, mould my heart after theirs, that a life may proceed from it as from theirs. And into Thy hands we commend our heart, though we endeavour to watch and pray and fight. Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the city, the watchmen waketh but in vain. Adieu, old boy, I wish you the very best, give my regards to those at the Rooses’ and to any other acquaintances you might see, and believe me, after a handshake in thought, Your most loving brother Vincent. Shake Uncle Jan’s35 hand for me. Isleworth My dear Theo, It’s again high time that you heard something from me. Thank God you’re recovering, I long so much for Christmas – perhaps that time will come before we know it, even though it seems a long way off. Theo, your brother spoke for the first time in God’s house last Sunday, in the place where it is written ‘I will give peace in this place’. I’m copying out what it was herewith. May it be the first of many. It was a clear autumn day and a lovely walk from here to Richmond along the Thames, which reflected the large chestnut trees with their load of yellow leaves and the clear blue sky, and between the tree-tops the part of Richmond that lies on the hill, the houses with their red roofs and windows without curtains and green gardens, and the grey tower above it all, and below, the large grey bridge with tall poplars on either side, with people crossing it who looked like small black figures. When I stood in the pulpit I felt like someone emerging from a dark, underground vault into the friendly daylight, and it’s a wonderful thought that from now on, wherever I go, I’ll be preaching the gospel – to do that well one must have the gospel in his heart, may He bring this about. God says, Let there be light: and there is light. He speaks, and it is done. He commands, and it stands, and it stands fast. Faithful is He that calleth us, who also will do it. You know enough of the world, Theo, to see how a poor preacher stands rather alone as far as the world is concerned – but He can awaken in us, more and more, awareness and 
   firmness of faith. ‘And yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me’. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Praise, Christian, there on your left hand, And on your right, is God – When I have no more strength to stand, When anguished, there is God – When loving hand of faithful friend Helps not, there is God – In death and agony at life’s end, Yes, everywhere is God. How I long for Christmas and to see all of you, old boy, it seems to me that I’ve grown years older in these few months. The panting hart, the hunt escapèd, Cries no harder for the pleasure Of fresh flowing streams of water Than my soul doth long for God. Yea, my soul thirsts for the Lord, God of life, oh when shall I Approach Thy sight, and drawing nigh, Give Thee praise in Thine own house. Why art thou cast down, my soul, Disquieted in me, oh why? Foster again the faith of old, Rejoice in praising Him most high. Oft hath he taken your distress And turned it into happiness. Hope in Him, eyes heavenward raised, For to my God I still give praise. My boy, if illness and difficulties come to meet us, let us thank Him for bringing us into these hours – and let us not forget meekness, for it is written: On this man will I look, even on him who is poor and sorrowful and who trembleth at My word. Yesterday evening I went to Richmond again, and took a walk there on a large common surrounded by trees, and houses around it, above which the tower rose. Dew lay on the grass and it was growing dark; on one side the sky was still full of the glow of the sun that had just set there, on the other side the moon was rising. An old lady (dressed in black) with lovely grey hair was walking beneath the trees. In the middle of the common, some boys had lit a big fire, which one saw flickering in the distance; I thought of this: when once life’s evening overcomes me, worn down by ills and strife always, for every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Adieu, a handshake in thought from Your most loving brother, Vincent Regards to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg, Haanebeeks, Van Stockums and everyone at the Rooses’ and Van Iterson and if you should see someone or other whom I know. Your brother was indeed moved when he stood at the foot of the pulpit and bowed his head and prayed ‘Abba, Father, let Thy name be our beginning’. On Thursday week I hope to speak at Mr Jones’s church:14 And the Lord added daily to the church such as should be saved, on John and Theagenes.
   Psalm 119:19 I am a stranger in the earth, hide not Thy commandments from me. It is an old faith and it is a good faith that our life is a pilgrims progress – that we are strangers in the earth, but that though this be so, yet we are not alone for our Father is with us. We are pilgrims, our life is a long walk, a journey from earth to heaven. The beginning of this life is this. There is one who remembereth no more Her sorrow and Her anguish for joy that a man is born into the world. She is our Mother. The end of our pilgrimage is the entering in Our Fathers house where are many mansions, where He has gone before us to prepare a place for us. The end of this life is what we call death – it is an hour in which words are spoken, things are seen and felt that are kept in the secret chambers of the hearts of those who stand by, it is so that all of us have such things in our hearts or forebodings of such things. There is sorrow in the hour when a man is born into the world, but also joy19 – deep and unspeakable – thankfulness so great that it reacheth the highest Heavens. Yes the Angels of God, they smile, they hope and they rejoice when a man is born in the world. There is sorrow in the hour of death – but there too is joy unspeakable when it is the hour of death of one who has fought a good fight. There is One who has said, I am the resurrection and the life, if any man believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. There was an Apostle who heard a voice from heaven, saying: Blessed are they that die in the Lord for they rest from their labour and their works follow them. There is joy when a man is born in the world but there is greater joy when a Spirit has passed through great tribulation, when an Angel is born in Heaven. Sorrow is better than joy23 – and even in mirth the heart is sad24 – and it is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasts, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. Our nature is sorrowful but for those who have learnt and are learning to look at Jesus Christ there is always reason to rejoice. It is a good word, that of St Paul: As being sorrowful yet always rejoicing. For those who believe in Jesus Christ there is no death and no sorrow that is not mixed with hope – no despair – there is only a constantly being born again, a constantly going from darkness into light. They do not mourn as those who have no hope – Christian Faith makes life to evergreen life. We are pilgrims in the earth and strangers30 – we come from afar and we are going far. The journey of our life goes from the loving breast of our Mother on earth to the arms of our Father in heaven. Everything on earth changes – we have no abiding city here31 – it is the experience of everybody: That it is Gods will that we should part with what we dearest have on earth – we ourselves, we change in many respects, we are not what we once were, we shall not remain what we are now. From infancy we grow up to boys and girls – young men and young women – and if God spares us and helps us – to husbands and wives, Fathers and Mothers in our turn, and then, slowly but surely the face that once had the ‘early dew of morning’32 gets its wrinkles, the eyes that once beamed with youth and gladness speak of a sincere deep and earnest sadness – though they may keep the fire of Faith, Hope and Charity33 – though they may beam with Gods spirit. The hair turns grey or we loosea it – ah – indeed we only pass through the earth, we only pass through life – we are strangers and pilgrims in the earth. The world passes and all its glory. Let our later days be nearer to Thee and therefore better than these. 
   Yet we may not live on just anyhow – no, we have a strife to strive and a fight to fight. What is it we must do: We must love God with all our strength, with all our might, with all our heart, with all our soul, we must love our neighbour as ourselves. These two commandments we must keep and if we follow after these, if we are devoted to this, we are not alone for our Father in Heaven is with us, helps us and guides us, gives us strength day by day, hour by hour. and so we can do all things through Christ who gives us might. We are strangers in the earth, hide not Thy commandments from us. Open Thou our eyes, that we may behold wondrous things out of Thy law. Teach us to do Thy will40 and influence our hearts that the love of Christ may constrain us41 and that we may be brought to do what we must do to be saved. On the road from earth to Heaven Do Thou guide us with Thine eye. We are weak but Thou art mighty Hold us with Thy powerful hand. Our life, we might compare it to a journey, we go from the place where we were born to a far off haven. Our earlier life might be compared to sailing on a river, but very soon the waves become higher, the wind more violent, we are at sea almost before we are aware of it – and the prayer from the heart ariseth to God: Protect me o God, for my bark is so small and Thy sea is so great. The heart of man is very much like the sea, it has its storms, it has its tides and in its depths it has its pearls too. The heart that seeks for God and for a Godly life has more storms than any other. Let us see how the Psalmist describes a storm at sea, He must have felt the storm in his heart to describe it so. We read in the 107th Psalm, They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord and His wonders in the deep. For He commandeth and raiseth up a stormy wind which lifteth up the waves thereof. They mount up to Heaven, they go down again to the depth, their soul melteth in them because of their trouble. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble and He bringeth them out of their distresses, He bringeth them unto their desired haven. Do we not feel this sometimes on the sea of our lives. Does not everyone of you feel with me the storms of life or their forebodings or their recollections? And now let us read a description of another storm at sea in the New Testament, as we find it in the VIth Chapter of the Gospel according to St John in the 17th to the 21st verse. And the disciples entered into a ship and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew. So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea and drawing nigh unto the ship and they were afraid. Then they willingly received Him into the ship and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went. You who have experienced the great storms of life, you over whom all the waves and all the billows of the Lord have gone – have you not heard, when your heart failed for fear, the beloved well known voice – with something in its tone that reminded you of the voices that charmed your childhood – the voice of Him whose name is Saviour and Prince of peace, saying as it were to you personally – mind to you personally ‘It is I, be not afraid’. Fear not. Let not your heart be troubled. And we whose lives have been calm up to now, calm in comparison of what others have felt – let us not fear the storms of life, amidst the high waves of the sea and under the grey clouds of the sky we shall see Him approaching for Whom we have so often longed and watched, Him we need so – and we shall 
   hear His voice, It is I, be not afraid. And if after an hour or season of anguish or distress51 or great difficulty or pain or sorrow we hear Him ask us ‘Dost Thou love me’ then let us say, Lord Thou knowest all things, Thou knowest that I love Thee. And let us keep that heart full of the love of Christ and may from thence issue a life which the love of Christ constraineth. Lord Thou knowest all things, Thou knowest that I love Thee, when we look back on our past we feel sometimes as if we did love Thee, for whatsoever we have loved, we loved in Thy name. Have we not often felt as a widow and an orphan – in joy and prosperity as well, and more even than under grief – because of the thought of Thee. Truly our soul waiteth for Thee more than they that watch for the morning54 – our eyes are up unto Thee, o Thou who dwellest in Heavens. In our days too there can be such a thing as seeking the Lord. What is it we ask of God – is it a great thing? Yes it is a great thing, peace for the ground of our heart, rest for our soul – give us that one thing and then we want not much more, then we can do without many things, then can we suffer great things for Thy names sake. We want to know that we are Thine and that Thou art ours, we want to be thine – to be Christians. We want a Father, a Fathers love and a Fathers approval. May the experience of life make our eye single57 and fix it on Thee. May we grow better as we go on in life. We have spoken of the storms on the journey of life, but now let us speak of the calms and joys of Christian life. And yet, my dear friends, let us rather cling to the seasons of difficulty and work and sorrow, even for the calms are treacherous often. The heart has its storms, has its seasons of drooping58 but also its calms and even its times of exaltation. There is a time of sighing and of praying but there is also a time of answer to prayer. Weeping may endure for a night but joy cometh in the morning. The heart that is fainting May grow full to o’erflowing And they that behold it Shall wonder and know not That God at its fountains Far off has been raining. My peace I leave with you61 – we saw how there is peace even in the storm. Thanks be to God who has given us to be born and to live in a Christian country. Has any of us forgotten the golden hours of our early days at home, and since we left that home – for many of us have had to leave that home and to earn their living and to make their way in the world. Has He not brought us thus far, have we lacked anything. We believe Lord, help Thou our unbelief. I still feel the rapture, the thrill of joy I felt when for the first time I cast a deep look in the lives of my Parents, when I felt by instinct how much they were Christians. And I still feel that feeling of eternal youth and enthusiasm wherewith I went to God, saying ‘I will be a Christian too’. 
   Are we what we dreamt we should be? No – but still – the sorrows of life, the multitude of things of daily life and of daily duties, so much more numerous than we expected – the tossing to and fro in the world, they have covered it over – but it is not dead, it sleepeth. The old eternal faith and love of Christ, it may sleep in us but it is not dead and God can revive it in us. But though to be born again to eternal life, to the life of Faith, Hope and Charity66 – and to an evergreen life – to the life of a Christian and of a Christian workman67 be a gift of God, a work of God – and of God alone – yet let us put the hand to the plough68 on the field of our heart, let us cast out our net once more69 – let us try once more – God knows the intention of the spirit, God knows us better than we know ourselves for He made us and not we ourselves. He knows of what things we have need, He knows what is good for us. May He give His blessing on the seed of His word72 that has been sown in our hearts. God helping us, we shall get through life. With every temptation He will give a way to escape. Father we pray Thee not that Thou shouldest take us out of the world, but we pray Thee to keep us from evil. Give us neither poverty nor riches, feed us with bread convenient for us. And let Thy songs be our delight in the houses of our pilgrimage. God of our Fathers be our God: may their people be our people, their Faith our faith. We are strangers in the earth, hide not Thy commandments from us but may the love of Christ constrain us. Entreat us not to leave Thee or to refrain from following after Thee. Thy people shall be our people, Thou shalt be our God. Our life is a pilgrims progress. I once saw a very beautiful picture, it was a landscape at evening. In the distance on the right hand side a row of hills appearing blue in the evening mist. Above those hills the splendour of the sunset, the grey clouds with their linings of silver and gold and purple. The landscape is a plain or heath covered with grass and heather, here and there the white stem of a birch tree and its yellow leaves, for it was in Autumn. Through the landscape a road leads to a high mountain far far away, on the top of that mountain a city whereon the setting sun casts a glory. On the road walks a pilgrim, staff in hand. He has been walking for a good long while already and he is very tired. And now he meets a woman, a figure in black that makes one think of St Pauls word ‘As being sorrowful yet always rejoicing’. That Angel of God has been placed there to encourage the pilgrims and to answer their questions: 

And the pilgrim asks her: 
 
Does the road go uphill then all the way?


and the answer is
 
 “Yes to the very end”─


and he asks again:
 
And will the journey take all day long?


and the answer is:
 
“From morn till night my friend”.


 And the pilgrim goes on sorrowful yet always rejoicing82 – sorrowful because it is so far off and the road so long. Hopeful as he looks up to the eternal city far away, resplendent in the evening glow, and he thinks of two old sayings he has heard long ago – the one is: ‘There must much strife be striven There must much suffering be suffered There must much prayer be prayed And then the end will be peace.’83 and the other: The water comes up to the lips But higher comes it not. And he says, I shall be more and more tired but also nearer and nearer to Thee. Has not man a strife on earth? But there is a consolation from God in this life. An angel of God, comforting men – that is the Angel of Charity. Let us not forget Her. And when everyone of us goes back to daily things and daily duties, let us not forget – that things are not what they seem, that God by the things of daily life teacheth us higher things, that our life is a pilgrims progress and that we are strangers in the earth – but that we have a God and Father who preserveth strangers, and that we are all bretheren. Amen. And now the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, our Father, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us for evermore. Amen. (Reading Scripture Psalm XCI) 
   Tossed with rough winds and faint with fear, Above the tempest soft and clear What still small accents greet mine ear ‘’t Is I, be not afraid.’ ’t Is I, who washed thy spirit white; ’t Is I, who gave thy blind eyes sight, ’t Is I, thy Lord, thy life, thy light, ’t Is I, be not afraid. These raging winds, this surging sea Have spent their deadly force on me They bear no breath of wrath to Thee ’t Is I, be not afraid. This bitter cup, I drank it first To thee it is no draught accurst The hand that gives it thee is pierced ‘’t Is I, be not afraid’. When on the other side thy feet, Shall rest, mid thousand welcomes sweet; One well known voice thy heart shall greet – ’t Is I, be not afraid. Mine eyes are watching by thy bed Mine arms are underneath thy head My blessing is around Thee shed ‘’t Is I, be not afraid’. Again, a handshake in thought – yesterday evening I was at Turnham Green in place of Mr Jones, who wasn’t well. I walked over there with the oldest boy, 17 years old, but he’s as big as I am and has a beard. He’ll go into business later, his father has a large factory; he has a good, honest, feeling heart and a great need of religion, it is his hope and desire to do good among the workers later on in life, I recommended ‘Felix Holt’ by Eliot90 to him. It was lovely in the park91 with the old elm trees in the moonlight and the dew on the grass. It was so good for me to speak in the little church, it is a little wooden church. Goodbye, Theo. Goodbye, old boy, I hope I’ve written it so that you’ll be able to read it. Remain steadfast and do get well soon. Isleworth, 10 November 1876. My dear Theo, I feel the need to enclose a few words to you. You’ll be having pleasant days at home, I almost envy you, old boy. What lovely autumn weather we’re having. You probably see the sun rising in the morning too. Which room are you sleeping in? If you can get ‘The imitation of Christ’ one of these days, read some of it, it’s a wonderful book, one that’s very enlightening. It describes so beautifully, for the one who wrote the book did it himself, how good it is to wage the holy war of devotion to one’s duty, and the heartfelt joy that is to be found in doing good deeds and in doing what one does well. You must read the letter for Pa and Ma sometime, I’ve taken such lovely walks recently, which were especially good after the anxiety of the first months here. It is indeed true that every day has its own evil3 and its own good, too. But how terrible life must 
   be, especially later on – when the evil of each day increases as far as the things of the world are concerned – if it isn’t supported and comforted by faith. And in Christ all things of the world can improve and become sanctified, as it were. These are beautiful words, and happy are those who come across them, ‘Nothing pleaseth me but in Christ, and in Him all things please me’. But one doesn’t achieve this all of a sudden. But he that seeketh findeth. Do write a few words again the next time Pa and Ma write. I hope to go to Richmond again on Monday evening and to take the words: But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion. Theo, woe is me if I don’t preach the gospel, and if I didn’t have my sight fixed on that and 
   didn’t have hope and faith in Christ, then I would only have woe. Now, however, I have a bit of spirit as well. I should have liked you to be in the little church at Turnham Green last Thursday evening; I walked over there with the oldest boy in the school and told him several of Andersen’s fairy tales, including ‘The story of a mother’. And now we’re slowly heading towards winter, and many dread it, but Christmas is wonderful, it’s like the moss on the roofs and like the pine and the holly and the ivy in the snow. How I’d like to come with Anna, may she find something soon, I’ll write to her again today. Today one of the maids left, they don’t have it easy here and she couldn’t stand it any longer – indeed, 
   everyone, richer or poorer, stronger or weaker, has moments when he can go no further, when ‘all these things seem to be against us’, when much of what we have built collapses. And yet, one mustn’t lose heart, Elijah had to pray all of seven times, and David had ashes on his head many a time. There’s a new assistant teacher at the school, because I’ll have to work more at Turnham Green from now on. He has never been away from home before, and won’t find it easy in the beginning. And now a handshake in thought, it’s already late and I’m rather tired. I wish you well. Do think now and then of Your most loving and affectionate brother Vincent Isleworth, 25 Nov. 1876 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, which I received at the same time as one from Etten. So you’re back at the gallery. Do whatever your hand finds to do, with all your might, and your work and prayers cannot fail to be blessed. How I’d have liked to go along on that walk to Het Heike and to Sprundel2 in the first snow. But before I go further, I’ll copy out a couple of poems that you’ll no doubt like. The journey of life3 Two lovers by a mossgrown spring They leaned soft cheeks together Mingled the dark and sunny hair, And heard the wooing thrushes sing o Budding time o Loves best prime. Two wedded from the portal steps The bells made happy carolings The air was soft as fanning wings While petals on the pathway slept O pure eyed bride o tender pride. Two faces o’er a cradle bent Two hands above the head were locked These pressed each other while they rocked Those watched a life which love had sent O solemn hour o hidden power. Two parents by the evening fire The red light fell about their knees On heads that rose by slow degrees Like buds upon the lily spire O patient life O tender strife. The two still sat together there The red light shone about their knees But all the heads by slow degrees Had gone and left that lonely pair O Voyage fast O Banished past. The red light shone upon the floor And made the space between them wide They drew their chairs up side by side Their pale cheeks joined, and said ‘once more’ O, memories! O past that is! The three little chairs. They sat alone by the bright woodfire The grey-haired dame and the aged sire Dreaming of days gone by; The tear drop fell on the wrinkled cheek They both had thoughts that they could not speak, And each heart uttered a sigh. For their sad and tearful eyes descried Three little chairs placed side by side Against the sitting room wall; Old fashioned enough as there they stood Their seats of flag, and their frames of wood, With their backs so straight and tall. Then the sire shook His silvery head, And with trembling voice he gently said, ‘Mother, those empty chairs, They bring us such sad, sad thoughts tonight, We’ll put them for ever out of sight In the small dark room upstairs’. But she answered: Father, no, not yet; For I look at them, and I forget That the children went away, The boys come back, and our Mary, too, With her apron on of checkered blue And sit here every day. Johnny still whittles a ships tall masts, And Willie his leaden bullets casts While Mary her patchwork sows; At evening time three childish prayers Go up to God from those little chairs, So softly that no one knows. Johnny comes back from the billowy deep, Willie wakes from the battle field sleep, To say good night to me: Mary’s a wife and mother no more, But a tired child whose play-time is o’er, And comes to rest on my knee. So let them stand there – though empty now, And every time when alone we bow At the Fathers throne to pray, We’ll ask to meet the children above In our Saviours home of rest and love, Where no child goeth away. In his letter Pa wrote, among other things: ‘in the afternoon I had to go to Hoeven, Ma had ordered the cab but it couldn’t come, because they hadn’t yet been able to have the horses’ shoes frosted – I therefore decided to go on foot and good Uncle Jan5 didn’t want me to go alone, so he came along. It was a hard journey, but Uncle Jan rightly said: the devil is never so black that you can’t look him in the face. And indeed, we arrived there and returned safe and sound, even though there was a gale blowing, coupled with freezing rain, so that the roads were slippery as ice, and I cannot describe how wonderful it was to sit so cosily in a nice warm room in the evening, resting after work – that dear Theo was still with us then’. Shall we, too, go once again to some church in this way? As sorrowful yet alway rejoicing, with everlasting joy in our hearts because we are the poor in the kingdom of God, because we have found in Christ a friend in our lives that sticketh closer than a brother, who brought us to the end of the journey as to the door of the Father’s house. May God grant it – what God hath done is done aright. Last Sunday evening I went to a village on the Thames, Petersham. In the morning I had been at the Sunday school at Turnham Green, and went after sunset from there to Richmond and then on to Petersham. It grew dark early and I wasn’t sure of the way, it was a surprisingly muddy road over a kind of embankment or rise on the hill covered with gnarled elm trees and shrubs. At last I saw below the rise a light in a small house, and scrambled and waded over to it, and there I was told the way. But, old boy, 
   there was a beautiful little wooden church with a kindly light11 at the end of that dark road, I read Acts V:14-16. Acts XII:5-17, Peter in prison, and Acts XX:7-37, Paul preaching in Macedonia, and then I told the story of John and Theagenes yet again. There was a harmonium in the church, played by a young woman from a boarding school that was attending en masse. In the morning it was so beautiful on the way to Turnham Green, the chestnut trees and clear blue sky and the morning sun were reflected in the water of the Thames, the grass was gloriously green and everywhere all around the sound of church bells. The day before I’d gone on a long journey to London, I left here at 4 in the morning, arrived at Hyde Park at half past six, the mist was lying on the grass and leaves were falling from the trees, in the distance one saw the shimmering lights of street-lamps that hadn’t yet been put out, and the towers of Westminster Abbey and the Houses of Parliament, and the sun rose red in the morning mist – from there on to Whitechapel, that poor district of London, then to Chancery Lane and Westminster, then to Clapham to visit Mrs Loyer again, her birthday was the day before. She is indeed a widow in whose heart the psalms of David and the chapters of Isaiah are not dead but sleeping. Her name is written in the book of life. I also went to Mr Obach’s to see his wife and children again. Then from there to Lewisham, where I arrived at the Gladwells at half past three. It was exactly 3 months ago that I was there that Saturday their daughter was buried, I stayed with them around 3 hours and thoughts of many kinds occurred to all of us, too many to express. There I also wrote to Harry in Paris. I hope you’ll see him sometime. 
   It may well be that you too will go to Paris sometime. That night I was back here at half past ten, I went part of the way with the underground railway. Fortunately I’d received some money for Mr Jones. Am working on Ps. 42:1, My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God. At Petersham I told the congregation that they would be hearing poor English, but that when I spoke I thought of the man in the parable who said ‘have patience with me, and I will pay thee all’, God help me. At Mr Obach’s I saw the painting, or rather the sketch, by Boughton: the pilgrim’s progress. If you can ever get Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s progress, it’s very worthwhile reading. For my part I love it with heart and soul. It’s night-time now, I’m still doing a bit of work for the Gladwells at Lewisham, copying out one thing and another etc.; one must strike while the iron is hot and soften the human heart when it is burning within us. Tomorrow off to London again for Mr Jones. Beneath that poem The journey of life and The three little chairs one should write: that in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth. So be it. A handshake in thought, give my regards to Mr and Mrs Tersteeg and to everyone at the Rooses’ and the Haanebeeks’ and the Van Stockums’ and the Mauves’, adieu and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent  Etten, 31 December 18761 My dear Theo, I sincerely wish you the best in the new year, I wish you well and may you be blessed in all things. Wonderful to have seen each other again, how beautiful it was that morning you left, and how often we’ll think back on that trip to Chaam. Ma’s eye is hurting a lot again, she has a bandage on; Pa delivered such a beautiful sermon again this morning. And now this evening New Year’s Eve again, if only you were here. Now then, there’s something I must tell you: a couple of days ago Mr Braat of Dordrecht3 paid a visit to Uncle Vincent and they spoke about me, and Uncle asked Mr B. whether he would have a place for me, if I should wish it. Mr B. thought he might have a place, and said that I should come sometime to talk about it. So I went there early yesterday morning; Pa and Ma and I, too, thought it was something we shouldn’t let pass without seeing what it was. Agreed that after the New Year I should go to him for a week, after that we’ll see. There are many things that make it desirable, first and foremost my being back in Holland near Pa and Ma, and also you and the others. Moreover, the salary would certainly be a little better than with Mr Jones, and especially with an eye to later, when a man has need of more, 
   one is obliged to think of such things. As far as the other thing is concerned, for these reasons I won’t give it up. Pa’s spirit is so great and many-sided, and at all events I hope that something of it will develop in me. The change means that now, instead of teaching those boys, I’ll be working in a bookshop. How often we’ve longed to be together, and how terrible it is to feel so far away from one another in cases of illness or anxiety, as we felt, for example, during your illness, and then the feeling that lack of money may very well stand in the way of our being together in times of need. It’s quite possible, then, that I’ll go there. Yesterday evening I was at Uncle Vincent’s to tell him that I’d just been to Dordrecht, it was a stormy evening, you can imagine how beautiful the road to Princenhage was with the dark clouds with their silver linings. I also went briefly to the Roman Catholic church, where evening Mass was under way, it was a beautiful sight, all those peasants and their wives with their black clothes and white caps, and the church looked so friendly in the evening light. You must also tell Mr Tersteeg straightaway that I’ll be going there for a week to see how it goes, let His Hon. read this letter, if you will, and be sure to give him and his wife my best wishes for a happy New Year. I’m writing in great haste, Anna and the girls6 and Cor went to Princenhage, and Pa wanted me to go with them. Aunt7 came back with them in the carriage and I went for a walk with Willem Carbentus. Now, old boy, dear brother, what good days those were when we were all together, have a good New Year’s Eve and believe me Your loving brother Vincent More soon – adieu. If you write, send your letter to Dordrecht. Dordrecht, 21 January 1877 My dear Theo, You’ll have expected a letter sooner; things are going rather well in the shop, and it’s so busy that I go there at 8 o’clock in the morning and come back at 1 o’clock at night, but I’m happy about that. I hope to go to Etten on 11 February. As you know, that’s when they’ll celebrate Pa’s birthday, would you be able to come as well? I hope to give Pa Eliot’s ‘Novellen’ (a translation of Scenes from clerical life), if we were to give something together we could give him Adam Bede4 as well. Wrote last Sunday to Mr Jones and his wife that I’m not coming back, and without my being able to help it, the letter grew quite long – out of the abundance of the heart5 – did wish that they, for their part, would remember me, and asked them ‘to wrap my recollection in the cloak of Charity’. The two prints of Christus Consolator that I got from you are hanging in my little room7 – saw the paintings in the museum, and also ‘Christ in Gethsemane’ by Scheffer, which is unforgettable, a long time ago that painting moved Pa just as much – then there’s a sketch of The sorrows of the earth10 and various drawings, and also the portrait of his studio12 and, as you know, the portrait of his Mother. There are other beautiful paintings as well, such as the Achenbach14 and Schelfhout15 and Koekkoek16 and, among others, a beautiful Allebé, an old man by the stove.
   Will we look at them together some day? The first Sunday I was here I heard a sermon on ‘Behold, I make all things new’, and in the evening ‘Now we see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things’. This morning I went to hear the Rev. Beversen in a small old church, it was the Lord’s Supper and his text was ‘If any man thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink’. The window of my room looks out over gardens with pine trees and poplars etc. and the back of old houses, including a large one covered with ivy, ‘a strange old plant is the ivy green’, said Dickens. There can be something so serious and rather sombre in that view, and you should see it with the morning sun on it. When I look at it I sometimes think of a letter of yours in which you speak of such an ivy-covered house, do you remember it? 
   If you can afford it – if I can, I’ll do it too – subscribe to this year’s Katholieke Illustratie24, which has Doré’s prints of London – the wharves on the Thames, Westminster, Whitechapel, the Underground railway &c. &c. One of the people in the house I live in is a schoolmaster. Last Sunday, and today as well, we took a lovely walk along the canals and outside town as well, along the river Merwede, we also passed the place where you waited for the boat. This evening when the sun went down and was reflected in the water and the windows, throwing a strong golden glow on everything, it was just like a painting by Cuyp. This evening I went to hear the Rev. Keller van Hoorn, who spoke on ‘I come to do Thy will, O Lord’. He just lost his daughter, and in all his words – I also heard him speak on ‘He that hath not loved knoweth not God; for God is love’32 – one can sense what he feels. Write again soon when you have the time, I’ll have rather a lot of bookkeeping to do for the time being and will no doubt be busy. Give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’, and accept a handshake in thought from Your loving brother Vincent My dear Theo, Adam Bede costs 2. guilders, so herewith you get back 1. guilders. Now I only hope that it will give them some pleasure at home, but no doubt it will. Thanks for your letter, which made me so happy. When next we meet we’ll look each other straight in the eye. I sometimes think how wonderful it is that we have the same ground beneath our feet and that we speak the same language. Last week we were flooded here. Coming from the shop between 12 and 1 at night, I took another turn around the Grote Kerk. The wind was blowing hard in the elm trees surrounding it, and the moon shone through the rain-clouds and reflected in the canals that were already filled to the brim. At 3 o’clock in the morning we were all rushing around at Rijken’s, the grocer in whose house I’m lodging, bringing things upstairs from the shop, because the water was an ell high in the house. There was quite a bit of commotion, and in all the downstairs rooms people were busy bringing upstairs what they could, and a small boat came down the street. In the morning, when it was beginning to grow light, one saw a group of men at the end of the street, wading one after another to their warehouses. There’s a lot of damage, the water has also got into the place where Mr Braat keeps his paper &c., not because of the flood but because of the great pressure coming from under the ground.
   Mr Braat says it will cost him a banknote of the largest kind. It took us a day and a half to carry everything to an upstairs flat. Working with your hands like that for a day is a welcome change, though it was a pity it was for that reason. You should have seen the sun go down that evening, the streets shone of gold, the way Cuyp7 used to paint them. Longing to have my trunk, which is on the way, one reason being to have some prints hanging in my room again. I now have Christus Consolator, which you gave me, and two English woodcuts, namely the Supper at Emmaus:10 ‘But they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent’, and another: ‘They that sat in darkness and the shadow of death have seen a great light’;12 ‘Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning’. There can come a time in life when one is tired of everything, as it were, and has the feeling as if everything that one does is wrong, and there’s certainly some truth in that – is this a feeling that one ought to avoid and repress, or it is rather ‘the godly sorrow’ that one must not fear but carefully consider whether it can perhaps compel us to do good – is it perhaps ‘the godly sorrow that worketh a choice not to be repented of’? And at such times, in which one feels tired of oneself, one may think with heedfulness, hope and love of the words ‘Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your soul. For My yoke is easy, and my burden is light’. ‘If any man will come after Me, 
   let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow Me.’16 At such times one may well reflect upon: ‘Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God’. If we let ourselves be taught by the experience of life and led by godly sorrow, then new vitality may spring from the tired heart. If we are once good and tired, then we shall believe more firmly in God, and shall find in Christ, through His word, a Friend and Comforter. And then there may be times when we feel ‘thou removest my iniquities from me as far as the east is from the west’, when we feel something of ‘the zeal for Thine house hath eaten me up’19 and ‘our God is a consuming fire’20 – when we shall again know what it is to be fervent in spirit. Hope will not always fade away. Let us not forget ‘the things which we have heard from the beginning’. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. God so loved the world, that He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Nothing shall separate us from the Love of Christ, neither things present, nor things to come. Rejoice on earth, praise God on high, Let thankful tears stream from your eye For Him from whom all blessings flow. This joyful day then celebrate, The greatest the world has seen to date, On its horizon all aglow. Still welcoming us, that blessed night, In which the stars with beauteous light And heavenly hosts with one glad voice In Jesus’ coming do rejoice. I know in Whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. The panting hart, the hunt escapèd, Cries no harder for the pleasure Of fresh flowing streams of water Than my soul doth long for God. Yea, my soul thirsts for the Lord, God of life, oh when shall I Approach Thy sight, and drawing nigh, Give Thee praise in Thine own house. Why art thou cast down, my soul, Disquieted in me, oh why? Foster again the faith of old, Rejoice in praising Him most high. Oft hath he taken your distress And turned it into happiness. Hope in Him, eyes heavenward raised, For to my God I still give praise. Hope will not always fade forever. Last Sunday morning I was in the French church here, which is very serious and dignified and has something very appealing. The text was Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. The end of the sermon was ‘If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning’. After church I took a lovely walk alone on a dyke running past the mills, there was a brilliant sky above the meadows that was reflected in the ditches.    There are curious things in other countries, such as the French coast which I saw at Dieppe – the chalk cliffs with green grass on top37 – the sea and sky – the harbour with old boats like Daubigny paints them, with brown nets and sails, the small houses including a couple of restaurants with little white curtains and green pine branches in the window – the carts with white horses with big blue halters decorated with red tassels – the drivers with their blue smocks, the fishermen with their beards and oiled clothing and the French women with pale faces, dark, often somewhat deep-set eyes, black dress and white cap, and such as the streets of London in the rain with the street-lamps, and a night spent there on the steps of an old, small grey church, as happened to me this summer after that journey from Ramsgate38 – there are certainly curious things in other countries, too – but last Sunday when I was walking alone on that dyke, I thought how good that Dutch soil was, and I felt something akin to ‘today it is in mine heart to make a covenant with my God’39 – because memories of times past came back to me, including how often we walked with Pa to Rijsbergen40 and so on in the last days of February and heard the lark above the black fields with young green wheat, the shimmering blue sky with white clouds above – and then the paved road with the beech trees41 – O Jerusalem Jerusalem!42 or rather O Zundert O Zundert! Who knows but that we may go walking at the seaside together this summer? We really must remain good friends, Theo, and simply believe in God and trust with that faith of old43 in Him who is able to do above all that we ask or think44 – who can say to what heights grace can ascend? Hearty congratulations for today, it’s already half past 1 and therefore already 8 February. May God spare our Father for us for a long time yet ‘and may He join us intimately to one another and let our love of Him make that bond ever stronger’. Pa wrote that he had already seen starlings, do you remember how they used to sit on the church at Zundert? I haven’t seen any here yet – though there are a lot of crows on the Grote Kerk in the mornings. Now it’s almost spring again and the larks will return again. ‘He reneweth the face of the earth’48 and it is written, Behold, I make all things new, and just as He renews the face of the earth, so can He renew and strengthen the human soul and heart and mind – the nature of every true son somewhat resembles that of the son in the parable who ‘was dead, and is alive again’. Let us not forget the words ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, ‘unknown, and yet well known’, and write the word woe-spiritedness as two words, woe and spiritedness, and believe in God who in His own good time can make the loneliness disappear which we sometimes feel so much even in the bustle, of whom Joseph said ‘He hath made me forget my Father’s house and all my sorrow’54 – and yet Joseph did not forget his father – you know that of course, but you also know what he meant by those words. Do keep well, give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’, and especially to Mr Tersteeg and his wife, and accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Your most loving brother, Vincent Tell Mr Tersteeg that he shouldn’t be upset about the drawing examples being away for so long, it’s for the high school, 30 have already been chosen – but they still want to select some for the secondary school, which is why they have to keep them for another week or so. You’ll get them back as soon as possible. Old boy, send me that page from Michelet again, the one you sent me earlier is in my reading-desk57 in my trunk and I need it again – do write again soon. Dordrecht, 26 Feb. 1877 My dear Theo, The hours we spent together passed quickly, that small path behind the station where we saw the sun going down over the fields and the evening sky reflected in the ditches, and where those old moss-covered tree-trunks are standing, and the little mill in the distance – I’ll walk there again and think of you. Herewith the photograph of ‘The Huguenot’;2 hang it up in your room. You know the story, how a young man, on the day before St Bartholomew’s Eve, was warned by his girl, who knew what would happen that night, how she wanted him to wear the sign by which Catholics were recognized, a white arm-band. He didn’t want to do it, though, his religious beliefs and his duty were dearer to him than his girl. Don’t know if I already sent you that poem by Longfellow which I herewith copy out, it has often held a strong attraction for me, and will perhaps for you, too. Am glad that we saw Scheffer’s paintings5 together; that evening I went to see Mager, who lives with the lay reader of the Lutheran church in a truly old Dutch house. He has a nice room there, we sat together for a long time 
   talking, he told me about Menton7 and about a Christmas he had spent there, and I told him about ‘The wide, wide world’, which is such a beautiful book. Thanks for coming here yesterday, and do let’s carry on having as few secrets as possible. We’re brothers, after all. Had rather a lot of work today, a great many trifling matters – but they’re my duty – if one had no sense of duty, who would be able to collect his thoughts at all, but a sense of duty sanctifies things and joins them together, and turns many small things into one large one. Write soon about how you got home, and whether that walk and the journey didn’t exhaust you too much. Am longing for a letter from you, also to hear whether you’ll be going to Etten. Accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Your loving brother, Vincent 
   The light of stars. The night is come, but not too soon, And sinking silently All silently the little moon Drops down beneath the sky. There is no light in earth or heaven But the cold light of stars And the first watch of night is given To the red planet Mars. Is it the tender star of love The star of love and dreams Oh no! from that blue tent above A hero’s armour gleams. And earnest thoughts within me rise When I behold afar Suspended in the evening skies The shield of that red star. O star of strength I see thee stand And smile upon my pain Thou beckonest with thy mailed hand And I am strong again. Within my breast there is no light But the red light of stars I give the first watch of the night To the red planet Mars. The star of the unconquered will He rises in my breast Serene and resolute and still And calm and selfpossessed. And thou too, whosoe’er thou art That readest this brief psalm As one by one thy hopes depart Be resolute and calm. O, fear not in a world like this And thou shalt know ere long Know, how sublime a thing it is To suffer and be strong. As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. a After years of city toil I hear the old church bells They sing a strange new song Whilst the old song in my memory dwells A strange new song, with strange new words That many sorrows bring And sorrowful I once again Will rejoice at what they sing. On this man will I look, saith the Lord, even on him that is poor and needy and sorrowful and that trembleth at My word. Father, we pray not that Thou shouldest take us out of the world, but that Thou shouldest deliver us from the evil. The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The Lord is not far from every one of us. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it. O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our Love for Thee make that bond ever stronger. And Moses took the rod of God in his hand. The devil is never so black that one cannot look him in the face. The same lips that spoke ‘be harmless as doves’ followed it immediately with ‘and wise as serpents’. Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me that I am meek and lowly in heart, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me. If any man hate not, even his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Father which seeth in secret. Anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto men, and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. We know not what we should pray, but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered, that our faith may not fail when our soul greatly desires to be sifted as wheat. Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying in us, Abba, Father. Your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him. The child puts great faith in his Father As befits the father’s worth. For who is closer than thy Father In Heaven or on earth? And He passed through the midst of them and said, Mine hour is not yet come. In the kingdom of Heaven they neither marry, nor are given in marriage. In Christ there is neither male nor female: but He is all, and in all. Dordrecht, 28 February 1877 My dear Theo, Write again soon if you can find a moment, remain steadfast, be of good heart, and He shall strengthen thine heart. Wrote something for us last night which I enclose herewith, read it sometime. Last night I left the office at 1 o’clock and walked around the Grote Kerk again and then along the canals and past that old gate3 to the Nieuwe Kerk4 and then home. It had snowed and everything was so still, the only thing one saw was a little light here and there in one or two upstairs rooms and, in the snow, the black figure of the rattle-man. It was high tide, and the canals and boats looked dark against the snow. It can be so beautiful there by those churches. The sky was grey and foggy, and the moon shone faintly through it. Thought of you while I was walking, and upon arriving home I wrote what I’m sending you. It’s perhaps a time when one needs ‘the sound of a psalm of the past and a lamentation from the Cross’. Behold, I thought in the dead of night To hear His voice, so tender, so soft. You have of course a De Génestet. Do read it 
   much and often. Pa sent me this once when I was in Paris:9 When I was a lad. When I was a lad, my life carefree as ever I girt myself up, did whatever I chose, Free to go wand’ring, to seek, to endeavour, Free in my travels, my dreams, my repose. Even for me, though, the hour was nearing Of calling, of mercy, of seriousness, When in my bosom the voice I’d been hearing Enquired ‘Do you love Me?’ – my soul answered ‘Yes’. Since that hour of waking my dreams are no longer, Another now leads me, at times ’gainst my will, Teaches my hands to reach eagerly further, To follow and carry, oh, happy and still. Yet now that life’s governed by the Supreme Being Despite pain and fetters, my soul torn apart – I find what in life I’d once vainly been seeking: More rest and more peace for my uneasy heart. There is no Priest who can explain Him whom no one seeks in vain. Although into Elijah I cannot transform The Lord soared past me after the storm. Writing to you in haste between tasks, adieu, a hearty handshake in thought from Your most loving brother Vincent 
   A prayer from the sons of the parsonage, from the children of the minister of the gospel; from those who were blessed by their Father when they left their parents’ house and for whom their Mother prayed that day, ‘Father, I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep them from the evil’. A prayer from the children of many prayers, a prayer from two brothers who slept together for so long in the little upstairs room in their parents’ house. And they lifted up their voices, and wept. O Lord, we love the light of Thy sun and the soughing of Thy sea; we lift up our eyes to Heaven and love the stars that Thou bringest out their host by number and that Thou callest all by name. We love the early morning hours when Thou makest Thy sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and the evening hour and the setting of the sun speaks to us of the evensong coming from our parents’ house: I know in whom my faith is founded, Though day and night change constantly, I know the rock on which I’m grounded, My Saviour waits, unfailingly. When once life’s evening overcomes me, Worn down by ills and strife always, For every day Thou hast allowed me, I’ll bring Thee higher, purer praise. Happily the farmer returns from ploughing, Bidding the gathering darkness good-day, So happy are we after all our toiling That the day will end without delay. Hope will not always fade forever. O Joy when now all grief is banned, The pilgrimage is long forgotten, And we are in the Promised Land. When we admire Thy works, however, ah! then we feel it, even when we thank Thee for the beauty of Thy creation, that we cannot find sufficient comfort for our life; the light of the sun and the glittering of the stars, Lord, that is not it, that cannot fulfil us, we need a different and better light – the light of the spirit and the mind that was in Jesus Christ18 – Love of Thee, of Christ and of one another in Him – the light of a Love that can constrain19 and can ignite the fire of fervour in our heart. We know that all labour is God’s labour, and that there is something good in all labour, but even that is not it, and we are often inclined to ask, with an eye to the beauty of nature, ‘turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity’, and with an eye to our labour ‘we labour for that which does not satisfy and that which does not fulfil’22 – what does that mean: Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life. There is a question in us – ‘What must we do to be saved?’ – and the answer to that question is ‘Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved’. If thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God, He shall save His people from their sins.
   We are surrounded by temptations of all kinds, by perils to the most precious thing we have, ‘our heart and our soul’. We are already far enough along life’s path to know that we are composed of great afflictions and needs and miseries, that we cannot stand with our own strength but only through Thy mercy and through the protection of Thy Love and the guidance of Thy Spirit. Into Thy hands, o Abba, Father! we commend our heart. Father, we pray not that Thou shouldest take us out of the world, but we pray and beseech Thee to keep us from the evil. Be Thou our keeper and our shade upon our right hand29 and teach us to fear Thee and to keep Thee ever in front of our eyes. And unite my heart and aim In Thy truth, to fear Thy Name. Thou knowest, O Lord, that we love Thy words with an old, old, deep-rooted, singular, fervent and very tender Love, that we believe that Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but Thy words shall not pass away, and that without the will of our heavenly Father not a hair can fall from our head. We believe in Thee and we love Thee, and though we live in everyday things, yet is the eye of our soul fixed on Thee, yea, our soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning. Still welcoming us, that blessed night, In which the stars with beauteous light And heavenly hosts with one glad voice In Jesus’ coming do rejoice. He who leads us through this earthly vale, He whose love for us will never fail, He has pledged His Love and a faithful hand To speed our journey to the Promised Land. Burning centre of our longing, Comforter of troubled minds, Jesus, hymns of our thanksgiving Praise Thy fervent love that binds. From Heaven above Thou wouldst be sent To Earth, tainted and torn apart, And take upon Thyself the debt That weighs upon our fearful heart. Love for Thee is our whole being, Thou who art our highest good, For Thy Cross gives life its meaning, Eternally rejoice we should. O how much to Thee we’re bound, Jesus, Saviour, God’s own son, Our hearts and voices do resound To God on high, we sing as one. And yet, O Lord, at present we are poor, and full of sorrow, and we quake at Thy word. Yea, we love Thy Bible and are sons of Thy Bible. Thy folk is our folk and Thou art our God. Intreat us not to leave Thee, to return from following after Thee, because Lord, to whom should we go? Thou hast the words of Eternal Life. Whom have we in Heaven but Thee? And there is none upon Earth that we desire beside Thee. Yea, we love the old stories and our heart is burning within us42 when we read them or when we are mindful of them. We quake at Thy words with inner emotion. God so loved the world, that he sent His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not be lost, but have Everlasting Life. And this is life Eternal, to know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent. And so he that hath not loved 
   knoweth not God; for God is Love. Love never faileth, but beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, believeth all things. Well, Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. And there is no fear in Love, because perfect Love casteth out fear. Lord, what is man, that Thou art mindful of him? And the Son of man, that Thou visitest him? We quake at Thy words with inner emotion, we who are uncomforted, tossed with tempest. ‘I have loved Thee with an everlasting Love.’52 Can a woman forget her child? And if she should forget, yet will I not forget Thee. I will comfort Thee as one whom his Mother comforteth. Lord, thou woundest, but Thy hands makest whole. Thy ways are higher than our ways, and Thy thoughts are higher than our thoughts, as high as Heaven is above earth. Thou, O Lord, canst remove our transgressions from us as far as the east is from the west, and though our sins be as scarlet, Thou, O Lord, canst make them white as snow. And faithful art Thou that callest us, who also will do it. Thou, Thou alone art able to do above all that we ask or think, and if mercy is shown us, who can say to what heights mercy can ascend? Therefore, because we have so much need of Thee, just as the disciples of old, on the road when evening had fallen and the sun had gone down, we constrain Thee, saying, ‘Abide with us’. Make our hearts Thy dwellingplace, and give us that other Comforter whom Thou hast promised to all who pray for Him, even the Spirit of truth, who will guide us into truth. Thy Love to us is wonderful, Thy Love to us is better than the love of women. Thou art a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. We are as unknown, and yet well known to Thee, make us whole and thoroughly sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. Teach us to lift up the hands which hang down, and to strengthen the feeble knees, teach us to arise when we have fallen, and when we have sat in darkness, be unto us a light. We also love Thy dark words: ‘those which sat in darkness and in the shadow of death saw great light’, they saw in their mind’s eye Jesus Christ, and Him crucified72 and Him in Gethsemane. They saw the image of the serpent lifted up by Moses in the wilderness, and they saw and understood and came unto Thee that they might have life. They beheld Thee and believed in Thee, and Thou hast given them the water of life freely. Make us Christians too – teach us to know Christ in His full worth and teach us the meaning of ‘Come unto Me, 
   all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light’. And yet he who hate not, even his own life also, he cannot be My disciple. Without Thee, O Eternal Being, oh, what would man on earth be? But Thou art come to preach deliverance to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind and to heal the broken-hearted. Thou art come to seek that which was lost, and to be a physician for them that are sick. Therefore we pray to Thee, O Christus Consolator, saying, Heal us, and we shall be healed; turn us, and we shall be turned; save us, and we shall be saved. Give us the best that there is in the world and in life, the bond of Love to Thee, which never lets go of us, not even when we suffer the most, and which even teaches us to take pleasure in infirmities and distresses and necessities and afflictions of all kinds. Into Thy hands we commend83 this, our very greatest good, which is life in reverent and pious and simple communion with Thee in prayer. Give us the spirit of prayer and supplication to Thee. May experience of life make our eye single84 and fix it on Thee more and more, make us worshippers in spirit and in truth, make us the poor in Thy kingdom. Make that the love of Thee constraineth us87 to examine Thy words zealously and make godly sorrow worketh a choice for salvation not to be repented of. Thy word is a light unto our life’s path and a lamp unto our feet. Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Thou art the bread of life which came down from Heaven, and whosoever desireth the living water of Thy word, it shall become in him as a source of living water. Whosoever eateth of that bread and drinketh of that water shall never hunger and never thirst for all eternity. Let us not depart from this life without having professed openly in one way or other our Love of Thee. O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our Love for Thee make that bond ever stronger. Deliver us from evil, especially the evil of sin. Give us the holiness96 and the regeneration97 of which Thy scriptures speak, in Thee all things can become new at all times. We also think that we desire a good thing of Thee99 when we pray that Thou shouldest grant, IN THY TIME, that we be given a ring on our finger and that we may meet her on our way and that we may become men and fathers. Convey us to the opposite shore, O Lord, because we cannot rest until we rest in Thee. When we were children, we spoke as children, we understood as children, we thought as children, but now that we are become men, help us to put away childish things. Yet Lord, keep our memory green, yea evergreen. Ensure that for us, too, that hour is nearing Of calling, of mercy, and seriousness, That in our hearts the voice we are hearing Enquires ‘Do you love Me?’, our soul answers ‘Yes!’104 Because we are sons, Thou hast sent forth the Spirit of Thy Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Again we commend ourselves to Thy Love, into Thy hands we commit our heart and our life. Be Thou the Hearer of our prayers and of those of our parents and let us not go before giving us Thy blessing, not now or ever. Amen, yea, Amen. 
   Psalm 42 As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God? My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say unto me, Where is thy God? When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance. O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill Mizar. Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord will command his lovingkindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. I will say unto God my rock, why hast thou forgotten me? Why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying to Him, Abba, Father. If thou art wretched, shamed, perplexed, Then do not sin, renounce thy will Speak to thyself and mend thy ways And be in thy God meek and still. Though many ask in desperation Who will shew us any good? Lord, after fearful lamentation, Show us the sweet light of Thy face Grant us Thy favour and Thy grace. Psalm 23 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for His name’s sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in my presence:110 Thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Who rejoices in grey hair, and in the words of the Lord, which are a light unto life’s path and a lamp unto our feet? Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace.  ‘Nothing troubles his end. It’s the end of a fine day.’114 
   Psalm 25 Unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. O my God, I trust in Thee: let me not be ashamed. Shew me Thy ways, O Lord; teach me Thy paths. Lead me in Thy truth, and teach me: for Thou art the God of my salvation; on Thee do I wait all the day. Remember, O Lord, Thy tender mercies and Thy lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me for Thy goodness’ sake, O Lord. Good is the Lord and upright: therefore will He teach sinners in the way. The meek will He guide in judgment: and the meek will He teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep His covenant and His testimonies. For Thy name’s sake, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great. What man is he that feareth the Lord? Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall inherit the earth. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him; and he will shew them His covenant. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord; for He shall pluck my feet out of the net. Turn Thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and afflicted. The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distresses. Look upon mine affliction and my pain; and forgive all my sins. Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they have something cruel against me. O KEEP MY SOUL, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I put my trust in Thee. Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I wait on Thee. Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. Make us masters, because we are Thy faithful servants and Thy true worshippers in spirit and in truth. Amen, yea, amen. Lord, take not Thy holy spirit away from the sons, from their Father and from their Father’s house, and grant that they may stand before the door of their own house before they know it, although they now say, how shall we ever get there? Grant that we may live in that house for many days120 and that that may be the way to ‘my Father’s house where there are many mansions’. Grant also that we may stand before the door of that house before we know it, although we shall often say ‘how shall we ever get there?’ and grant that we may live therein with the blessed who called to us What you are now, I used to be, what I am now, you will one day be!122 Grant that the Love of Christ may constrain us. Amen, yea, amen. Grant that we may meet her on our path, grant that one day Mrs van Gogh sits before us in the carriage.  Amen. 
   Psalm 91 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in Him will I trust. Surely He shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with His wings, and under His wings shalt thou trust: His truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day; nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the wicked. Because Thou hast made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. For He shall command His angels and give them charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under feet. Because he hath set his love upon Me, saith God, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known My name. He shall call upon Me, and I will answer him: I will be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him. With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation. Lord, do not let us go, except Thou bless us. Father, into Thy hands we commend our Spirit, our soul and our heart, make us Christians and sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. Amen. What old friends we are already, let us always remain so!128 When the Lord’s Supper is next celebrated here I’ll attend it, you should do the same in The Hague, let us go as true participants in the Lord’s Supper. And take this piece of rye bread too, and eat it, as I do, with our thoughts turned toward our Father’s house2 and to the things we heard and saw there. And believe me Your most loving and affectionate brother Vincent And pray: Lord, bless this food!3 Herewith Ecce Homo, send me Mater Dolorosa. Adieu, old boy, a handshake in thought. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape. Let none of these things move thee. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, be of good heart, and He shall strengthen thine heart. Today I received a long letter from home in which Pa asked me if it would suit us both to go to Amsterdam next Sunday to visit Uncle Cor. If it’s all right with you, then I’ll come to you in The Hague on Saturday evening on the train that arrives a few minutes after 11, and in the morning we’ll take the first train to Amsterdam and stay till evening. We ought to do it, Pa seems very keen on the idea, then we’ll be together again next Sunday. It is possible, isn’t it, for me to stay with you that night? Otherwise I’ll go to the Toelast. Write a postcard now if you agree, let us stick close together. Herewith a few words for Uncle Cor, add something to it if you like. It’s already late, this afternoon I took a walk, because I felt such a need to, first around the Grote Kerk, then the Nieuwe Kerk, and then up onto the dyke where all those mills8 are that one sees in the distance if one walks along the railway tracks. There is so much in that singular landscape and vicinity that speaks and 
   seems to say ‘be of good courage, fear not’. There are days in one’s life when all members suffer because one member suffers, and where there is true ‘godly sorrow,’11 God is not far, He who will hold us. If we believe that, let us, in those days, fervently desire and ask for things we should like to see happen, that we might also be heard. Would you also ask for me that a way be found14 for me to devote my life, more so than is now the case, to the service of Him and the gospel? I continue to insist and I believe that I’ll be heard, I say this in all humility and bowing myself down, as it were. It is such an import and such a difficult matter, and yet I desire it. One might say it isn’t humanly possible, but if I think about it more seriously and delve beneath the surface of what is humanly impossible, then truly my soul waiteth upon God, for it is possible for Him who speaks, and it is done, who commands, and it stands, and it stands fast. O Theo, Theo, old boy, if only it might happen to me and that deluge of downcastness about everything which I undertook and failed at, that torrent of reproaches I’ve heard and felt, if it might be taken away from me and if I might be given the opportunity and the strength and the love required to develop and to persevere and to stand firm in that for which my Father and I would offer the Lord such heartfelt thanks. A handshake in thought and regards to everyone at the Rooses’, ask it for me in this thy day, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent Dordrecht, 16 March 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, want to make sure you receive a few words in Amsterdam. We’ll see each other Sunday, I hope, and it will be good for us to be together again. My hearty congratulations to you on Willemien’s birthday, what a nice girl she’s become. From Pa and Ma she’s getting ‘de wijde wijde wereld’, and from me ‘het Kerstfeest aan de pool’ by Bungener. I’m glad for you that you left on your trip so soon, that makes for a good change. I’m so sad and so alone, you say. ‘And yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me’. ‘Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world’. Holding fast in all places and in all circumstances to the thought of Christ, that is a good thing. ‘I set the Lord before me alway, the Lord is my keeper, He is the shade upon my right hand’, said David. What a hard life the farmers in Brabant have; Aarssen, for example, where does their strength come from? And those poor women, what is the support in their lives? Might it not be that image of Christ, the wondrous power and attraction of that name? Might it not be what the painter painted in his ‘Light of the world’?
   I cannot tell you how much I sometimes yearn for the Bible. I do read something out of it every day, but I’d so much like to know it by heart and to see life in the light of that word of which it is said: Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. I believe and trust that my life will still be changed, and that that longing for Him will be satisfied. I, too, am sometimes sad and alone, especially when I walk around a church or a parsonage. ‘A poor man in the kingdom of heaven’, that is a name that attracts a man and is a gospel to him. Let us not give up and go on seeking meekness and longsuffering. And be true to your own nature and be separate, distinguish between good and evil even if you don’t show it. Do it for yourself. ‘Do not leave this life without having given evidence in one way or other of your love for Christ’, says Claudius. You’ve had an experience that can make you wise your whole life long, do hold that fast which thou hast. Feed me with the bread of my tears, truth, teach me. And it also says: ‘The sacrifices of God are a broken heart and a broken spirit; a broken heart, O God, thou wilt not despise’. HATE sin, be discerning, do you remember how Pa used to pray every morning ‘Preserve us from all evil, especially the evil of sin’? And he certainly knows. And it also says: he who hate not, yea his own life also, he cannot be My disciple.
   I’m longing for Sunday, I hope you’ll have a good trip, working is always a wonderful thing, and there is something good in all labour. Am still busy until late at night, but glad it’s like this. Be sure to give my regards to Uncle Cor and Aunt. There are storks here already, but I haven’t heard any larks yet. It’s often stormy, and then one sees swarms of crows and starlings. The photograph of Mater Dolorosa25 that you sent is hanging in my room, how beautiful it is. Do you remember it hanging in Pa’s study at Zundert? Now Theo, I wish you the very best, we’ll be seeing each other soon, I’m longing to see the prints you wrote about, accept a handshake in thought, see you Sunday, adieu, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent Dordrecht, 231 March 1877 My dear Theo, Want to make sure you receive a letter on your trip. What a good day we spent together in Amsterdam, I stood there watching the train you left in as long as it was still in sight. We’re such old friends, aren’t we? How long we’ve walked together, starting in the black fields with the young green wheat at Zundert, where we heard the lark at this time of year with Pa. In the morning3 I went with Uncle Cor to see Uncle Stricker, where we had a long talk about you-know-what. In the evening at half past six Uncle Cor brought me to the station, it was a beautiful evening and in everything there was so much that seemed to speak, the weather was still and there was a bit of mist in the streets, as is usually the case in London. Uncle had toothache that morning, but fortunately it didn’t last, we went to the flower market5 too, it’s good to love flowers and pine branches and ivy and hedges of hawthorn, we have seen them from the very beginning. Wrote home about how we had spent our time in Amsterdam and what we talked about. Arriving here I found a letter from home at Rijken’s. Pa was unable to preach last Sunday and the Rev. Kam stood in for him7 – I know that his heart is burning within him8 that something might happen so that I could give myself over not only almost but altogether9 to following Him, Pa always hoped I would do so, oh! may it come to pass, and may there be a blessing on it. 
   The print that you gave me of ‘Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not pass away’11 and the portrait of the Rev. Heldring12 are already hanging in my room, oh, I’m so glad to have them, they give me hope. Am writing to you offhand about my plans; my idea becomes clear and firm by doing so. For the time being I’m thinking of the words ‘it is my portion to keep Thy word’, have such a desire to familiarize myself with the treasure of biblical scripture, to know all those old stories thoroughly and lovingly, especially to learn what we know about Christ. In our family, which is indeed a Christian family in the full sense of the word, there has always been a minister of the gospel as far back as one can see, from generation to generation. Why should that voice not be heard in this and in following generations? Why should a member of that family not now feel himself called to that office and think, with some reason, that he can and must declare himself and seek the means to achieve that goal? It is my prayer and deepest desire that the spirit of my Father and Grandfather may rest upon me, and that it may be given me to be a Christian and a Christian labourer, that my life may resemble that of them whom I name – the more, the better – for behold, that old wine is good and I desire not the new. Their God shall be my God, and their people my people, that this may be my portion: to know Christ in His full worth18 and to be constrained by 
   His love. What that Love is, is so beautifully said in the words ‘as sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, and in 1 Cor. XIII, it beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things, it never faileth. It is in my heart today, those words of the pilgrims going to Emmaus when evening was come and the sun had gone down, ‘But they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us’. You like it too, that ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, keep it in mind, because they are good words and a good cloak in the storm of life, keep it in mind at this time, now that you’ve experienced so much lately. And be careful, because even though it’s no small thing that you’ve experienced, yet, if I see rightly, there is something greater in store, and you too will remember the words of the Lord:23 I have loved thee with an everlasting Love, I will comfort you as one whom his mother comforteth. I shall send you another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, I will make a new covenant with you, be separate, and touch not the unclean thing, I will be your God, and you shall be My people, I will be a Father unto you, and you shall be My sons and daughters. Hate sin and the places where it resides, and come not nigh, it attracts so easily with a false appearance of being something great, and does what the devil did to Christ when he showed Him all the kingdoms of the earth and their glory and said, ‘All these things will I give Thee, if Thou wilt kneel down and worship me’. There is something better than the glory of worldly things:33 it is the feeling we get when our heart burns 
   within us upon hearing His word, it is faith in God, the Love of Christ, faith in immortality, in a life after this life. Hold fast to what you have. Theo, old boy, brother whom I love, I have such a great longing for that thing which you know of, but how shall I ever get it? How I wish that I, like Pa, had already done a lot of the difficult work of a Christian labourer and minister of the gospel and sower of the word. You see, Pa can count his services and Bible readings and visits to the sick and the poor and his written sermons by the thousands, and still he doesn’t look back but goes on doing good. Lift up your eyes38 for me and pray that it may be given to me, just as I now do for you, may He give you the desires of thine heart, He who knows us better than we know ourselves and who is able to do above all that we ask or think, for His ways are higher than our ways and His thoughts are higher than our thoughts, as high as the Heaven is above the earth. And may you continue to think of Christ as a Comforter and God as a refuge. I wish you well on your trip; write soon, and accept a handshake in thought, adieu, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent May Pa get better soon, try to be in Etten at Easter, things will be all fine once more when we’re together again. With many things in the past, also with what you’ve experienced, it could be that ‘thou shalt find it after many days’. Etten, 8 April 1877 My dear Theo, Want to make sure you get a letter quickly, I’m writing to you again from Etten, as you see. Yesterday morning I got a letter from Pa in which Pa wrote that Aertsen was dying and how Pa had been there again, as he wished to see and speak to Pa again. When I heard that, my heart was drawn to Zundert so strongly that I felt the need to go there again. But more about this later – I just read your last letter and saw that your trip is over and you’re back in The Hague. Do write to me again soon, too, and let’s remain close to one another. Today a postcard from Anna to say she arrived safely, may things go well for her. Haven’t you also noticed that something has come over her that recalls the women who loved Jesus of whom the Bible tells. And every time I think of her I am reminded of the words of Béranger: In palaces and under thatch, The Virgin said, with my hands I have prepared honey and balm For mankind’s suffering. And how sweet she was in that family in Welwyn, sharing their joys and sorrows, keeping nothing back of what she had in her to be a help and comfort to them, also during the time that child there was sick and died;6 I saw so clearly how everyone there loved her. She did her very best from the start, 
   getting up early in the winter to make the fire with her own hands, even though the first days weren’t easy and she wrote that she was thinking: Without Thee, O Eternal Being, oh, what would become of man on earth? Whom have I in heaven but Thee? And there is none upon earth that I desire beside Thee. And how she wanted so much to attend the Lord’s Supper, and went there and found strength in it. And Pa and Ma love her so much, and we all do too, yes, do let’s stay close to one another. On Saturday evening I left on the last train from Dordrecht to Oudenbosch and walked from there to Zundert. It was so beautiful there on the heath, even though it was dark one could make out the heath and the pine-woods and the marshes stretching far and wide, it reminded me of that illustration by Bodmer that’s hanging in Pa’s study. The sky was grey but the evening star shone through the clouds, and now and then other stars were visible too. It was still very early when I arrived at the cemetery in Zundert, where it was so quiet, I went to have a look at all the old places11 and paths and waited for the sun to rise. You know the story of the Resurrection, everything there reminded me of it in that quiet cemetery this morning. I heard from Aertsen and Mientje, as soon as they were up, that their Father had died that night, oh, they 
   were so sad and their hearts were so full, for Hein14 also arrived there early. I was glad to be there; I sympathized with them because I had also been so fond of the man. The aunts16 send you their regards, and Jan Doome17 too, whom I also went to see. From there I walked with Hein to Rijsbergen, and was in the house around an hour and we read together. Woutje Prins19 had also sat up for 3 nights with the deceased, and had stood by him till the last. His passing was peaceful. I’ll never forget that noble head lying there on the pillow; one saw, besides the signs of suffering, an expression of peace and something holy. Oh, it was so beautiful, I’d say that it spoke of all the singularity this land has and the life of these Brabant folk. And they were all so full of praise for Pa and what Pa had always been to them, and how fond those two were of each other. Then I walked with Hein Aertsen to Etten and am now at home, leaving early tomorrow morning. Goodbye, old boy, it’s time for the post, accept a handshake in thought and believe me, after giving my regards to all your housemates, Your most loving brother, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of yesterday, which I answer today, having an hour of time. Remembered that when we were at the Van der Hoop Museum1 we talked about the book by Bürger, which you’ll be receiving in the post, in it you’ll also find a woodcut after G. Doré, Judith and Holofernes, and one after Brion &c. for your scrapbook. Do go on with it, because you’ll turn it into something beautiful in time. Do accept my small contribution, I need so much to commune with you by way of such trifles; when I come back to my room I’m reminded of you again and again by the illustrations on the wall. The love between brothers is a great support in life, that is an age-old truth, let us seek that support, let the fire of love between us not be extinguished, but let instead the experience of life make that bond ever stronger, let us remain upright7 and candid with each other, let there be no secrets – as things stand today. Thanks for your last letter. ‘It’s not over yet’, you say – no, it cannot be over yet. Your heart will need to trust itself and to pour forth – you’ll be torn between the two – her and my Father8 – I think that our Father loves you more 
   than she does – that his love is worth more – these words are ‘fine gold’:9 The child puts great faith in his Father As befits the father’s worth. For who is closer than thy Father, is he nearer In Heaven or on earth? By all means go there again11 if things get to be too much for you. This week I got a letter from Uncle Vincent, who wrote that he thought it unnecessary to continue the correspondence, that he cannot help me in this matter. A letter came at the same time from Mr Gladwell, in which he wrote about Harry – who must have endured much anguish, being very hard pressed to make him act as he did. Mr Görlitz is in Etten today to talk to Pa about the vacancy for a teaching post at Leur. I sincerely hope he’ll get it. Today was the first early sermon, which I attended, the sermon was very beautiful, about Jesus showing himself to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias, John 21. Herewith a few poems by Uhland which I found moving. Do write soon, old boy, give my warm regards to your housemates, and accept a handshake in thought from Your loving brother, Vincent Flowers from Etten, brought by Görlitz. Dordrecht, 23 April 1877 My dear Theo, I received your letter of 21 April, thanks for writing so quickly – and that letter gave me a feeling of joy such as the woman must have had who found the piece of silver she had lost, namely, you wrote that Aunt Koos’s little reading-desk2 containing Pa and Ma’s letters was found at the Rooses’ when the house was being cleaned. What fear and worry I felt last year, looking for it and imagining that I’d taken it to England and that it got left behind at one of the houses I stayed at in London. It’s wonderful that it has turned up, I’m so grateful, keep it for the time being, I’ll be needing it in Amsterdam when I’m ‘on the way’. I now remember very clearly having left it behind at the Rooses’ when I left for England, because there wasn’t much room in my trunk and also because I thought it would be safer there than travelling with me in foreign parts. It seems to me to be new proof, as it were, and a sign like others that I think I’ve been noticing recently, 
   that my efforts will be blessed, that things will go well for me, and the thing I desire so fervently will be granted me – something of the faith of old5 has come alive in me that my thoughts shall be established6 and a right spirit renewed7 and the soul restored to the old faith. I alone am making a choice for my life. Set your heart and mind, you too, on something good, on a good cause, and desire it of the Lord. Uncle Jan was in Etten and said that my room was already ready. Mr Braat is negotiating with someone, so in May I’ll probably put my hand to the plough. Hanging in that little room will be the prints I got from you, and so I’ll be reminded of you daily – beneath that one after Rosenthal, that monk, I have written ‘Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Whosoever will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me13 – in the kingdom of heaven14 they do not marry, and are not given in marriage’. Beneath its pendant, The imitation of Jesus Christ (after Ruipérez), I wrote what we used to hear Pa say: ‘Lord, I should so much like to be earnest’.
   This morning I heard a very beautiful sermon by the Rev. Keller van Hoorn on ‘and that from a child thou hast known the scriptures’. This afternoon Görlitz, Mager, Ten Broek19 and I went to the museum to see the Scheffers – they’re really beautiful. Have I already told you that Görlitz went to Etten to apply for the teaching position that has fallen vacant in Leur? He came back filled with everything he had seen there. Pa had given a sermon on Jacob who slept in the field at Bethel, and he had found it all so moving. I’d be happy for him if he got the position; then he would probably marry very soon. Last week I got a letter from Harry Gladwell himself. Something has happened to him, a little different, admittedly, and yet essentially the same as what happened to you, and he is in dangerous surroundings there – the fowlers22 are many and clever. I hope to hear more soon, and we’ll talk about it sometime. I know little of Taine’s life, I assume that he travelled a lot in France, Italy, England and also Holland, one could deduce as much from his writings. He is certainly an artist. I still have the first book by Bürger, Musées.
   Now, Theo, have a nice Sunday today. I hope to see you if I go to Amsterdam. For a ‘sower of the word’25 as I hope to become, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, just like for a sower of corn in the field26 – and the earth shall bring forth all manner of thorns and thistles27 – do let’s continue to support each other and to seek brotherly love. Adieu, give my regards to your housemates, and accept a handshake in thought, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent It’s raining here today and one could imagine oneself in London. But how green everything outside is becoming. This morning Görlitz, Ten Broek and I went for a walk while it was still early. Isn’t it beautiful in the Scheveningen Bosjes as well? Shall we walk there together again, and on the beach? I hope so! When I go to post this I hope to take that small path behind the station again where we walked together. Dordrecht, 30 April 1877 My dear Theo, My hearty congratulations on this day, many happy returns, have a good day tomorrow, and many good days in the year you’re now beginning. Time passes quickly and the days fly past – yet something can remain and the past isn’t entirely lost – we can become richer and firmer of spirit, of character, of heart, we can become richer in God, we can become richer in the fine gold4 of life, the love for one another and the feeling ‘and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me’. May it be so for all of us, it is a good prayer, that one of Father’s: O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our love for Thee make that bond ever stronger. I hope to see you soon, because when I go to Amsterdam I’m planning to stop in The Hague for a while. Don’t tell anyone about this, though, because my main purpose in doing so is to see you. I’m going to Etten this Wednesday, to stay there for a few days before putting my hand to the plough. I should have liked you to be here yesterday; in the morning I heard the Rev. Hooyer’s farewell sermon in the little French church. The church was full, he spoke with fire and feeling, I was moved by the sight of that 
   distinguished, singular congregation, the mood was very earnest. He thanked them for the love that he had received from many of them, especially at difficult times, in the beginning, four years ago, when he was wrestling with the difficulties of speaking in French, because he’s a Dutchman. There were various other clergymen in the congregation. In the afternoon I went to the Grote Kerk to hear the Rev. Keller van Hoorn, whose text was ‘Our Father’; in the evening I heard the Rev. Greeff, whom I’d heard on my first Sunday evening here in Dordrecht. By chance, he took for his sermon yesterday the same text he had taken that first time: Now we see through a glass, darkly; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. After church I walked along that path behind the station where we walked together, thinking of you and wishing we could be together – and kept on walking until I came to the cemetery at the end of a black cinder road running through the meadows that looked so beautiful in the twilight. The cemetery looks a little like that drawing by Apol in ‘Eigen Haard’, there’s a canal around it and there’s a house surrounded by pine trees, yesterday evening the light was shining through the windows in such a friendly way – it’s an old house that looks like a parsonage.
   There can still be much good in store for both of us, let us learn to say after Pa ‘I never despair’15 and after Uncle Jan ‘the devil is never so black that one cannot look him in the face’. Write again soon, this Wednesday, then, I’ll be in Etten. Do you have De Plancy, Légendes des artistes, with woodcuts after Rochussen? I hope to bring it for you. These last few days I’ve managed, in between times, to work my way through the whole story of Christ from a catechism book written by Uncle Stricker, and I copied out the texts, which brought to mind so many paintings by Rembrandt and others. It is, I believe and trust, a choice not to be repented of, which I’ve made in an attempt to become a Christian and a Christian labourer. Yes, all things of the past can work together for good, familiarity with cities like London and Paris and life in such places as that school in Ramsgate and in Isleworth makes one more drawn and attached to many things and such books of the Bible as The Acts of the Apostles. Knowing and loving the work and life of such men as Jules Breton, Millet and Jacque, Rembrandt, Bosboom and so many others, can also be a source of ideas. 
   What a similarity there is between the work and life of Pa and that of such men; that of Pa I rate even higher. God help us, old boy, He can make you and all of us and me say, Lord, it is enough. Adieu, accept a handshake in thought and again, hearty congratulations from Your loving brother Vincent The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and give thee peace. May the Lord do above all that we ask and think. He is your keeper and the shade upon your right hand. May He be with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Give my regards to your housemates. Amsterdam, 19 May 1877 My dear Theo, What a good day we spent together, one we shall certainly remember. I want to make sure that you find a letter when you return from Etten. You’ll certainly have had a good time at home, write soon to say how you spent the day. Herewith you receive something for your portfolio, namely a lithograph after J. Maris, beneath which one might write: a poor man in the kingdom of God, and a lithograph after Mollinger. Had you seen this one before? I hadn’t. From a Jewish bookseller, who gets me the Latin and Greek books I need, I had the opportunity of choosing what I wanted from a large batch, and not at all expensive, 13 for 70 cents. Thought I’d take several for my room, to give it some atmosphere, which is necessary to get and refresh ideas. I’ll give you a list, then you’ll know what it looks like and what’s hanging there. 1 after Jamin6 (which is also hanging in your room), one after M. Maris, that little boy going to school, 5 after Bosboom8 — Van der Maaten, Funeral in the cornfield9 – Israëls, a poor man walking on a snowy road in winter, and Van Ostade, studio. Then there’s Allebé, a little old woman who has collected water and coals on a winter morning with snow on the streets. I sent that last one to Cor for his birthday. The Jewish bookseller had many more beautiful things but I can’t afford any more, and even though I’m hanging a few up, I’m not going to start collecting. Yesterday Uncle Cor sent me a batch of old paper, such as the sheet on which I’m writing to you. Isn’t it wonderful for doing my work on? I have a lot of work already, and it isn’t easy, but meekness14 will help one to get used to it. I only hope to bear in mind the ivy, ‘which stealeth on though he wears no wings’. Like the ivy on the walls, so the pen must cover the paper. Every day I go for a long walk. I recently came across a very nice part when I walked all the way down Buitenkant16 to the Hollandsche Spoor station, where there were people working with sand-carts &c. on the IJ, and I walked along all kinds of narrow little streets with gardens full of ivy. It was somehow similar to Ramsgate. At the station I turned left where all those mills are, down a street running alongside a canal lined with elm trees. Everything there puts one in mind of Rembrandt’s etchings. One of these days I’ll be starting General History from the book by Streckfuss, or rather, I’ve already started it. It won’t be easy, but taking it one step at a time and doing it well must surely produce results, this I fervently hope. But it will take time: this has been attested to by many, and not just Corot: ‘It took only forty years of work, thought and care.’22 For the work of men like Pa and the Rev. Keller van Hoorn, Uncle Stricker and so many others, a lot of practice is necessary, just as it is for painting. And a man says once in a while: however will I manage that? 
   And one’s own deeds, ideas and observation aren’t enough, we need the comfort and blessing and guidance of a higher power, and anyone with any earnestness and a desire to illumine his soul will recognize and experience this. Godly sorrow23 acts like leaven in dough. May that also be seen in the story of both our lives. Let us only believe in God and, holding fast to that belief, have faith in Him: God firmly spoke on mount and rock And set this word in stone And all who view this sacred writ May read the words intoned. The hardest rock will one day crumble The highest mount come tumbling down But this my covenant with Thee, O Upright One, remaineth sound. He who lets the Lord provide, And hopes for His aid in times of peril, Will find protection at God’s side, Be saved as by a miracle. He whose faith rests in God’s hands Will not have built on shifting sands. Doing whatever the hand finds to do, and, if we are pushed in the right direction and a door is opened unto us, as it were, proceeding in that direction, we may have something of the faith of old, which God pours into many a heart, into that of the mean as well as that of the mighty, into that of Aertsen32 as well as that of Pa or Uncle Jan or Uncle Cor — Rembrandt, Millet, Bosboom and how many others experienced the same thing. Yes, we can observe it, or at least traces of it, in nearly everyone, to a greater or lesser extent. He is not far from every one of us. Is Mrs Tersteeg continuing to do well, and have you already been to see Mauve? Just be steadfast, as you are doing, there can be good days in store for us if God wishes to spare our lives and give His blessing to what we do. Will you ever attend some little church of mine? May God grant it, and I believe that He shall. Meanwhile let us simply be grateful for our everyday life – if we are not confronted with anything unusual, and if we know a good prayer, then let us say it, like the one Pa once said on New Year’s Eve when it was very cold and the winter was not easy on anyone, our own household either – that prayer came from the secret recesses of his heart: O Lord, join us intimately to one another and let our Love for Thee make that bond ever stronger, preserve us from all evil, especially the evil of sin. Father, we pray not that Thou shouldest take us out of the world, but that Thou shouldest keep us from the evil. ‘Preserve us from too much self-reproach.’ Let us find grace in the eyes38 of those to whom we are closest and in the eyes of those who shall come after us. Whenever I look at a painting by Ruisdael, Van Goyen, Bosboom and so many others, I always think of the words ‘as sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’. Of woe-spiritedness. Will you come again on a Sunday to my study, and shall we go again together to the little church at Scheveningen? I hope so. Give my regards to your housemates, and accept in thought a handshake from Your most loving brother, Vincent Yesterday I saw a portrait of Michelet43 and looked at it again closely and thought of ‘his life of ink and paper’. In the evenings I’m tired and can’t get up as early as I’d like, but that will surely improve, and I hope I can force myself to do so. On Whit Monday I hope to be at Uncle Stricker’s in the afternoon and evening. Amsterdam, 21 May 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and for the church’s attestation, it’s a pity you didn’t go to Etten for Whitsun;2 I sincerely hope you’ll be able to go one Sunday soon. Did you get the attestation easily? Thanks for taking the trouble. Yesterday morning I went to the early service3 and heard a sermon, ‘I shall not always strive with man’, how after a time of disappointment and grief in life a time may come when one’s innermost desires and wishes may be fulfilled. At 10 in the morning I heard Uncle Stricker on Acts II:1-4, the pouring forth of the Holy Spirit. A very beautiful, warm address from the heart; this morning I’m going to hear Uncle again and must go now, I’ll write and tell you presently what his text was. It’s rainy today, and a long walk6 along Buitenkant to the Noorderkerk. There, by the Schreijerstoren, where one has a view of the IJ, the city looked like a painting by J. Maris. The text was I Corinthians 12:13, For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body. There are some beautiful churches here. This week I walked as far as the Zuiderzee10 on a dyke going to Zeeburg. This takes one past the Jodenkerkhof, which I visited as well. It’s very simple, full of old tombstones standing upright with Hebrew inscriptions and elderberries here and there, and covered with long, dark grass. Yesterday (Sunday) afternoon I went with Uncle Jan to Baarn, how beautiful it is there, we walked in the wood in the avenues of spruce and beech trees and saw the sun go down behind the oak copse. You can imagine how beautiful it is in the evening, around the time we came home yesterday, for example, at the wharf and the dockyard and the shore of the IJ, and there’s such a glorious smell of tar in the air that reminds one of pine-woods. Yesterday Uncle gave me some old black gloves and scarves. Thought we’d share them in brotherly fashion. You’ll receive them in a day or two as ‘samples without value’, because black gloves are a good thing, good like ivy, for example, and ‘mosses green and lichens fair’, and good like the fixed habit of going to church. This afternoon I’m going to Uncle Stricker’s, who asked me to come, Vos, Kee16 and Paul’s girl17 will be there too. Do you know an old English engraving ‘The vicar’s daughter’? It’s hanging at Baarn18 and struck me yesterday; look out for it if you come to Baarn. Its atmosphere recalls Die Abendglocke. Nevertheless, I find it such a pity that there, as well as in Uncle Jan’s best rooms, there is nothing hanging like Christus Consolator20 or Ecce Homo. The latter is hanging in your room, surely, at least I thought I noticed it there. Do make a habit of hanging it up everywhere you live, for that is right and is your due. This morning in church I saw a little old woman, probably the foot-stove woman, who reminded me so much of that etching by Rembrandt, a woman who has been reading the Bible and has fallen asleep leaning her head on her hand. C. Blanc writes about it so beautifully and with so much feeling, and I think Michelet does as well in his: there is no such thing as an old woman. The poem by De Génestet, ‘Haar pad in ’t leven loopt eenzaam af’26 also reminds me of it. 
   Will we also find ourselves in the evening of our life27 before we know it, as it were? – when we feel the days flying by, passing ever more quickly – it helps me to believe and trust that ‘man proposes, but God disposes’. Were you at the gallery in the mornings over the Whitsun holidays? I do hope you had a good time all the same. 22 May. Yesterday evening I was at Uncle Stricker’s, where it was very convivial. Vos, Kee, Paul’s girl and Jan29 were there, and it was after 11 when I got home, then I wrote until 12, how I wish that we could go to places together, I’d have liked you to be with us last night.  Do write a few words again soon, when you have a moment. This morning I still have a lot of work to do, I see that it isn’t easy and will no doubt become much more difficult, yet have unfaltering hope that I’ll succeed, and I’m also convinced that I’ll learn to work by working, and that my work will become better and more substantial. I’ve already begun studying the Bible, but only in the evenings, when I’ve finished my work for the day, or early in the morning – after all, that’s the most important thing – even though it’s now my duty to dedicate myself to studying other things, which I do, of course.  Yesterday at the Strickers’ I had to tell them about London and Paris, and whenever I do that I see it all before me again, all things from that past can also work together for good, I’m fond of much there, and that, ah, I’ve experienced that everywhere I’ve been, I also feel that when I walk the streets of The Hague or Zundert, for example, I shan’t easily forget that last journey there. Before I went to the Strickers’ I walked briefly through the Trippenhuis32 in order to see several paintings again, I’m sure you know which ones. Now, Theo, give my regards to one person or another you might see, write soon, I wish you the very best, accept a firm handshake in thought, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 28 May 1877 My dear Theo, Today Uncle Jan found some clothes that were Hendrik’s1 which he’s grown out of, and asked if I could use them, and I said if I might share them with you I’d gladly take them. So herewith a pair of duffle trousers2 which may well be of use to you in the autumn and winter, by which time you’ll likely be in need of them. I have a black pair. Today was stormy, on my way to my lessons this morning I looked towards the Zuiderzee from the bridge. There was one white stripe on the horizon with dark grey clouds above it, the rain pouring down from them in slanting lines in the distance, standing out against this was the long row of houses with the Oosterkerk. Uncle Jan went to Leiden yesterday, so I was alone that day. In the morning I went to the Oosterkerk and heard a sermon4 on Isaiah 55:8 and 9, ‘For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the Lord. For as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts higher than your thoughts’. Walked to the seaside in the afternoon, and spent the rest of the day writing. The work and writing don’t yet go as fast and easily as I’d wish, but I hope to learn by practice, but, old boy, if I could I’d like to skip over a few years, though I trust that I shall succeed and that my lips shall speak the fullness of preaching the gospel and that my hand shall write it, and I pray that that be given me, but first one must get some rest when one already has several years of work behind one and feels one is on the way and is doing the same thing as those whom one loves. This morning I was in Uncle Stricker’s study, it’s beautiful and he has a portrait of Calvin after Ary Scheffer5 hanging there, although I should have liked very much to see more prints on the wall. 
   Last week I got as far as Gen. XXIII, the burial of Sarah in the field that Abraham bought to bury her there in the cave of Machpelah, and I couldn’t help making a little drawing of how I imagined that place to be, it’s nothing very special but I’m enclosing it anyway. A good letter from home yesterday, wrote back today, also to Anna. You must also write again soon, for I’m longing to hear from you. Right now all the people are leaving the dockyard to go home, that’s nice to see. One hears them already early in the morning, I think there are around 3, of them, the sound of their footsteps is something like the sound of the sea. This morning bought from a Jew ‘Tobias’ after Rembrandt, a small engraving, for six cents. Uncle Jan sends you many regards, write him a word or two, or else write a sentence in a letter to me that I can read to him to thank him for the clothes. How is Mrs Tersteeg doing? I’m also eager to hear whether you’ve been to see Mauve. Aunt Mina and Paul’s girl10 will soon be going to Etten, that will be nice for them at home. Pa wrote that the church had been whitewashed and the organ painted. Yesterday 3 children were baptized. Lips11 is still no better, and Willem van Eekelen’s wife12 is also very ill. Did you hear that Uncle Vincent has bronchitis again, and it seems to be serious? It’s fortunate that Uncle is back in the country, and in his own house, and that Pa and Ma visit him almost every day. Now, old boy, I wish you the very best, give my regards to your housemates, please forgive me for not being able to pay the postage on the parcel, old chap, do write soon and accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent 
    Amsterdam, 30 May 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of today, I have to do a few things and so am writing in haste.
          Gave your letter to Uncle Jan, accept his warm regards and he thanks you for writing. There were some words in your letter that touched me, ‘I should really
          like to get away from everything, I’m the cause of everything and only make others sad, I
          alone have caused all this misery to myself and others’.
          Those were words that touched me – because that same feeling, exactly the same, nothing
          more and nothing less, is also on my conscience. When I think of the past – when I think of the future, of nearly
          insurmountable difficulties, of much and difficult work which I have no passion for, which
          I – the evil part of me, that is – would prefer to avoid, when I think of the eyes of so
          many that are fixed upon me – who, if I do not succeed, will know the reason why – who
          will not utter any ordinary reproaches but who, because they have been tried and are well
          versed in what is good and proper and fine gold, as it
          were, will say it by the expression on their faces: we helped you and have been a light
          unto you – we did for you what we could. Did you sincerely desire it? What are our wages
          and the fruits of our labours? You see, when I think of
          all that and of so much else, all manner of things – too many to mention, of all the
          troubles and worries which do not become less as one progresses through life, of
          suffering, of disappointment, of the danger of failing to a scandalous extent, then that
          desire is no stranger to me either – I would really like to get away from everything! And yet – I go on – but with caution and in the hope that I’ll succeed in
          warding off all these things, so that I can somehow answer all the reproaches that
          threaten, trusting that in spite of everything that seems to be against me I shall attain
          that thing that I desire, and, God willing, shall find grace in the eyes4 of some whom I love, and in the eyes of those who shall come after
          me. It is written, lift up the feeble hands, and the knees which hang
            down, and when the disciples had toiled all night and
          had taken nothing, it was said unto them, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets
            again. My head is sometimes numb and is often burning hot, and my thoughts are
          confused – how shall I ever get all that difficult and detailed study into it? – I don’t
          know – after those turbulent years, becoming accustomed to plain, well-ordered work and
          persevering in it isn’t always easy. And yet I go on, if we’re tired, isn’t it because
          we’ve already gone a long way, and if it’s true that man’s life on earth is a struggle,
          isn’t feeling tired and having a burning head a sign that we have struggled? When one
          labours at difficult work and strives for good results, one fights the good fight, the reward of which, surely, is already this: that one is
          preserved from much that is evil. And God beholds the labour and the sorrow, and can help in spite of everything.    Faith in God is for me a certainty – not some notion, not an idle belief,
          it is so, it is true – there is a God that lives9 – and He
          is with our parents, and his eye is also upon us, and I am certain that He intends us for something, and that we do
          not belong entirely to ourselves, as it were – and that God is none other than Christ of
          Whom we read in our Bible, whose word and story are also deep in your heart. If only I had
          worked at it sooner with all my might, yes, it would be better for me now – but even now
          He will be a mighty help, and it is in His power to make our life bearable, to keep us
          from evil, to let all things work together for
            good, to make the end of us peace. There is evil in the world and in ourselves, terrible things, and
          one doesn’t have to have gone far in life to dread much and to feel the need for
          unfaltering hope14 in a life after this one, and to know
          that without faith in a God one cannot live – cannot endure. But with that faith one can
          long endure. And now, there are words in our Bible that are emphatically repeated in
          various places, on various occasions, under various circumstances, Fear
            not, our Father took that to heart and he says
          ‘I never despair’, let us repeat it after him. Isn’t it
          your experience, too, that whenever you wanted to do something bad, you were held back –
          that whenever there was something upsetting you and you saw no way out, you came through
          it all unharmed? A book by Bunyan tells of a traveller who sees a lion lying at the side
          of the road he must traverse – and yet he continues on his way – there is nothing else he
          may or can do – and when he arrives at the place he notices that the lion is chained up
          and is only there to test the travellers’ courage. Thus
          it is in life more than once. There is much in store for us, but others have lived, and so
          whosoever loves his parents must follow them on life’s path. If you value the love and
          esteem of young people, declare your beliefs openly whenever suitable, and admit that you
          love Christ and the Bible, doesn’t a son love his Father better for this reason than for
          any other? Women and children and the simple often feel and know these things so
            deeply, and there is hidden in so many a heart a
          great and vigorous faith. We, too, are in need of this when we think of much that is in
          store for us, He spoke from all His experience of life, and we know how much must have
          been going on in the heart whose plenitude made His mouth utter the words ‘in the Heavenly
          Kingdom they do not marry, and are not given in marriage’, and who said, he who hate not, even his own life also, he cannot be
          My disciple. Yes, those words of the Lord, surely they
          are the words issuing from the mouth of God whereby man shall live – and not by bread
            alone21 and the more one seeks in those words, the more
          one shall find therein. When I was standing next to
          Aertsen’s body, the calm and seriousness and solemn
          stillness of death contrasted so greatly with us who were living, that everyone felt what
          his daughter24 said in her simplicity: he is delivered
          from the burden of life which we must still bear. And yet we are so attached to that old
          life because there is cheerfulness to counter despondency, and our heart and our soul are
          gladdened, just as the lark who cannot help singing in the morning, even if our soul is
          sometimes cast down within us and is disquieted in us.
          And the memory of everything we have loved remains and returns in the evening of our
            life.
It is not dead, but sleepeth27 and
          it is good to collect a great store of it. Accept a handshake in thought, and I wish you
          the very best, and write again soon to Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 31 May 1877 My dear Theo, It’s already late and everyone is already asleep, but I feel the need to write a few words to you again. You must persevere – you must go onward – as I must, too – we’re going through the same ordeal1 in many respects. In your last letter you write that you were thinking about moving elsewhere if possible, and you mention London and Paris. That might be good – oh, old boy, how deeply I love those cities, that’s to say I love much of what one meets with there, there’s also much that I hate – or at least don’t love as much as the hedges of thorn-bush and the green grass and the little grey churches. What you’re thinking of is not bad at all. Be aware, though – we must both make sure that we survive the time between now and the age of 30 or so – and we must beware of sin – after all, we’re in the midst of life – well then, we must fight a good fight2 – and we must become men – which we aren’t yet, neither of us – there is something greater in store for us, my conscience tells me so, we are not what others are – well then, but we can endeavour to become so. You know what I want. If I may become a clergyman, if I fulfil that position so that my work is equal to that of our Father, then I shall thank God. I have good hope that I shall succeed, it was once said to me by someone who was further on in life than I, and who was no stranger in Jerusalem3 – I mean someone who had sought it himself and had also found it; it was once said to me: I believe that you are a Christian, you see, it was so good for me to hear those words. You too hold fast, no matter what you wish for yourself, to the thought of Christ and keep His saying, as you do. It is good to believe that there is a God who knows what we need, better than we know it ourselves, and who helps us when we need help. It is also good to believe that, just as in the olden days, now, too, an angel is not far from those who feel godly sorrow5 – not only from those who are almost angels themselves, but especially those who need help from a higher power to keep them from evil, from the evil that we know is in the world and not far from us, not far from those who have a broken heart and a contrite spirit. I’ve carefully read the story of Elijah so often, and so often has it given me strength up to now: And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Beer-sheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. But he himself went a day’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers. And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree, behold, then an Angel touched him, 
   and said unto him, Arise and eat. And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again. And the Angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is too great for thee. And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And He said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts. And the Lord said unto him, ‘Go, return on thy way’. And that story does not stand alone, we read of the Angel who strengthened Him in Gethsemane, who was sorrowful, even unto death, of the Angel who woke Peter from his sleep in prison, of the Angel who appeared to Paul in the night and said ‘Fear not’. And we, although we saw no Angel, although we are not the same as those men of old, should we not know that there is strengthening from Above? This afternoon it was stormy and rained here, and I walked to the sea past the Jewish cemetery, a few days ago I also went for a walk there on Buitenkant near the Oosterspoor, where they’re working on the sand works &c. What a beautiful and heartening story that is too, the one about Jesus walking on the sea, Matthew XIV:22-33, And straightway Jesus constrained His disciples to get into a ship, and to go before Him unto the other side, while He sent the multitudes away. And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, He was there alone. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary. And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea. And when the disciples saw Him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear. But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of good cheer; it is I; be not afraid. And Peter answered Him and said, Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water. And He said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus. But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased. Believe in God, through faith one can become ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’16 and evergreen and we need not complain ‘if our youth disappears at the maturing of our powers’. Herewith something by Esquiros, I wish you the very best, write again soon, give my regards to your housemates and any acquaintances you might see, and accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent Read Ps. 23, 42 and 91 as well.  The Siege of Leiden. The city of Leiden is Holland’s Versailles, with its air of past grandeur, of all-pervading sadness and dignified solitude. It mourns not at all its festivities, nor the vanished splendours of a departed court, but it looks back wistfully on its defunct industry, its woollen mills, once famous throughout the world, now gone. These mills, the cradle of a new aristocracy, were founded in part by French refugees, who, following Saint Bartholomew and the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, brought to Holland their business, their wealth, their eminent men. The desire to regain a country made them enterprising and capable of surmounting adversity. And so, with their help, Leiden became what Manchester was later to become for Great Britain, the centre of a strong and productive industry. Of that economic glory and that wealth it retains only one town house (a magnificent fifteenth-century building), two large churches, splendid canals with wide, tree-lined quays, houses that still retain a memory of the good days of the Republic, and above all, a university. The origins of this famous university are connected with the siege that Leiden sustained in 1573. The causes that made the United Provinces rise up against domination by Spain are well known. Freedom of conscience shamefully abused, political and religious despotism, the Inquisition, censorship, arbitrary taxation, all these had outraged national feeling. In those days, says the historian Hooft, ranks, sexes and ages were mingled in a general persecution. The instruments of torture were everywhere to be seen. Gibbets and wheels were not sufficient in number. Trees bordering the roads were over-laden with corpses. Elsewhere, the flames rose up from countless execution pyres. Every day were erected gallows, from which the blood dripped. The very air, the source of life, seemed infected by it, and resembled an immense tomb. And then was seen a sight unique in the history of the world. A few hundred men, driven to despair – fishermen, shepherds, shopkeepers – came together to fight against the crushing oppression of a powerful government, and against armies deemed invincible. Following the example given by other cities in Holland, the residents of Leiden had declared themselves in favour of the union of the provinces, but in the last days of October they were attacked and surrounded by the Spaniards. The Prince of Orange wrote to them, telling them to organize the resistance at all costs. He himself undertook to seek all the means of coming to their aid. Hold out for three months, he told them; even if the siege should last longer, do not lose courage. If you are able to persevere despite the agonies of hunger, deliverance is assured; if, on the other hand, you yield, eternal servitude awaits you. But the enemy tried with flattering promises to open a way into the citadel. To such advances, the insurgents replied with this saying, and no more:22 The bird-catcher tricking the bird plays sweetly on the flute. The defence of the city was put into the hands of Janus Douza. The citizens swore an oath that they would bury themselves beneath the debris of their houses rather than yield. A siege currency was created. Although from the first all superfluous mouths had been sent away, famine soon raged. For 7 weeks, bread had not been seen in the city. Provisions of all kinds were exhausted. Grass, leaves, the bark of trees, the pelt of slaughtered beasts long since devoured, even earth, all became food. Famine was followed by plague. Of 16, residents who closed up the citadel, six or seven thousand perished. All that was to be seen was living corpses engaged in burying the dead. This city, defended by shades, nevertheless stood out against the fury of the opposing army, and against its own divisions. To the soldiers who yelled at them, You’re dying of hunger, surrender and you’ll receive a distribution of victuals, they answered from the top of the ramparts, When we run short of provisions we will eat our left hands forthwith, and keep our right hands to defend our freedom. But one day, famished bands of men presented themselves to the burgomaster of Leiden, Pieter Adriaanszoon van der Werff. They made a peremptory demand for bread or the surrender of the city. I have sworn to defend this city, answered the mayor, and with God’s help I hope to keep my word. I have no bread; but if my body may be of use to you in continuing the fight, take it, cut it up and divide it amongst you. The wretched men withdrew in silence.
 Holland’s fate lay within the walls of Leiden; the eyes of all the provinces were on that heroic city, but the citadel was so strongly blockaded that it was very difficult to come to its aid. At last, the Prince of Orange resolved to breach the dykes. It was a desperate decision. Nevertheless, the old Batavian proverb held good: Better a devastated land than one that is lost. And so the land was devastated by the waters and the crops engulfed. The sea, that natural enemy of Holland, came to Leiden’s aid, but it was slow in coming. The wind did not carry the flood with it. On those lazy waves, which fell far short of the city, there appeared boats bearing cannons. These boats, which had neither oars nor sails, and moved by means of wheels, were manned by fearsome Zeeland sailors, almost all of them wounded in the war for independence. They were men of savage mien, most of them disfigured by terrible but honourable wounds. They came in order to offer the ruined city the example and the counsel of desperate resistance. The besieged citizens could see the flotilla from the top of their ramparts, and they could speak with the crews, but impeded by a north-easterly wind, the water retreated instead of advancing, and carried hope away with it: the very walls were shaken. The enemy, on the other hand, although driven from certain advanced positions by the overflowing of these waters, still held its ground on the principal dykes. Leiden appeared lost, when the moon, just then becoming full, swelled the mass of the waters. The wind veered to the south-west. One of those violent, unremitting storms which, in ordinary times, cause such acute alarms for the country’s safety, broke upon the coasts. The sea, being no longer held back, enlarged the breaches already made in the dykes and flung itself upon the land, carrying before it terror, desolation and salvation. Taken by surprise and overwhelmed, rigid with terror at the extraordinary noise of the tempest and of the collapse of parts of the walls, the Spaniards abandoned their posts amid great commotion, throwing their cannons into the water. The same tide that carried them away brought the Zeeland fleet, loaded with provisions, to the gates of Leiden. A tremendous battle, an Amphibious battle, to borrow a Dutch historian’s expression, was engaged amongst the branches of trees, partly on the dykes and partly in the boats. The liberating sailors entered the city, but in the midst of the joy, how sad a sight presented itself to their eyes! On both banks of the great canal exhausted men cried out for provisions. With the avidity of animals they seized the bread and herrings that were handed out to them, and several of them who had survived famine succumbed to this food. This deliverance seemed to have something of the miraculous. The formidable Spanish army – attacked, drowned, scattered inland by the waters of the sea, which appeared to be guided by an unseen hand – had vanished like the army of Pharaoh. This sudden rout seemed to reveal the direct favour of God, who now loved the Netherlands as he had once loved Israel; chroniclers even tell how a young Dutch woman, Madeleine Moons, raised, no doubt, in the traditions of the Old Testament, had made the siege drag on, using her charms to distract the heart of Valdez, the commander-in-chief of the Spanish army. And here is a graver fact. Detained by an illness, the Prince of Orange had not been able to appear in person before the walls of Leiden. He was in Delft, and barely recovered, was listening to the sermon at one of the city’s churches, when they came to bring him the happy news of the lifting of the siege. He had the message passed to the preacher, who read it out. Tears flowed from all eyes, together with thanksgivings. Although the plague was still claiming victims in that unhappy city of Leiden, William the Silent hesitated not a moment in going there. Surrounded by the citizenry, who forgot their woes on seeing in this man the living fortress of liberty regained, he asked them which they preferred, exemption from certain taxes, or the foundation of a Protestant university. The citizens of Leiden did not waver in their choice, ‘A University’ was the general cry. This academy was established on February 9 1575. And so a great political idea protected such an institution, which would provide a focus for the intellectual movement of the Batavian Reformation. To found by force of arms the material independence of the United Provinces was not all; a national moral identity had also to be created. Alphonse Esquiros  Siege of Harlem23 One of the periods in the history of Holland that has left most traces in the buildings and the outward physiognomy of Dutch cities is the great movement that in the 16th century aroused the nation’s energies against foreign domination. Starting with Briel, the first citadel seized by the Dutch, we can follow step by step the alternating progress and reverses of that holy war. The city of Harlem, for example, still bears the scars of that heroic and desperate struggle that it waged against the Spanish. I have walked more than once round the old ramparts of that ancient fortress, now riven with cracks, pierced by new houses set proudly between their bastions, split by trees that grow from the very stone and whose shadows are cast over the surface of the canal. The sight of these walls and its gates, dark, narrow passageways that wind all the way into the city, brought back to mind the chief circumstances of the siege. In those times, the ramparts of the city of Harlem were already bad (I am speaking of the walls), but the residents’ patriotism took it upon itself to cover this ancient city, and such a boulevard thus proved impregnable. The siege of Harlem preceded that of Leiden. There was no lack of warnings. Amsterdam, which had yet made no open declaration of support for the Reformation and independence, laid before the residents of Harlem the dangers of the resistance to which they were committing themselves, the number and discipline of the enemy’s army, and the scant trust that could be placed in the Prince of Orange, who had so far succeeded in liberating not a single besieged city. At these counsels of human caution, the citizens hesitated. A bold and vigorous harangue by Wybald van Ripperda, captain of the civic guard, overcame their irresolution. He reminded them of the blood of their fellow-citizens that had flowed in the ruins of Naarden, and the loyalty they had sworn to the Prince of Orange. This speech was greeted by a unanimous shout of enthusiasm. ‘Yes,’ replied the citizens of Harlem, ‘each of us will give his life for the defence of the city and the triumph of the good cause.’ Images were promptly torn from the churches, and the reformed order of worship was established everywhere. On 9 December 1572, Don Frederico, the Duke of Alba’s lieutenant, marched on Harlem with sixty companies of Spanish infantry, sixteen of Germans, twenty of Walloons and fifteen hundred horse. These forces were overwhelming in comparison with those of the besieged. To begin with, the garrison numbered scarcely over 1, men, but every citizen became a soldier. Even the women flocked to take up arms. Kenau Hasselaar, a widow of a certain standing and a substantial fortune, formed a regiment of 300 women, who, while retaining their female attire, none the less showed manly intrepidity. However, the siege operations opened under bad auspices for the besieged. Don Frederico, covered by a dense fog as if by a cloak, seized the fort of Sparendam, a short distance from the city. He was thus able to launch his equipment for mounting an attack and entrenching his positions without being concerned about fire from the garrison. I curtail the story of this memorable siege. Hardly was a breach opened but it was at once closed up with timber, sacks, earth and anything that came to hand. The residents spent long winter nights building an inner wall, higher and stronger than the old one, which threatened to collapse entirely. Rich and poor, adults and children, men and women, everyone flocked to the defence works and wielded spades and picks. Scarcely a day passed but an assault was made by the besieged upon the besiegers. More than once, the Dutch threw themselves into the enemy’s trenches, and pillaged and set fire to his tents. The cold was severe, but winter became an ally; the elements appeared to be taking Holland’s part. The residents of Harlem received from those of Leiden a constant supply of provisions and munitions, carried on sledges across the lake that had turned into a sea of ice. Troop reinforcements reached them by the same route. Unhappily for the besieged, the severity of the season decreased, and spring, which gladdened all of nature, came and made the city’s sad situation even more grave. Although the Spaniards had made wide breaches near the gate of St John’s Cross, their assaults were twice repulsed, and after seven months of fruitless hostilities, and after suffering the loss of between ten and twelve thousand men, they were forced to raise the siege and to confine themselves to keeping the citadel blockaded. However, Bossu took advantage of the thaw to breach the dyke that held back the waters between the river IJ and the Harlem lake. By that means he opened a passage 
       through which a squadron made up of sixty naval launches entered the lake and took up positions before the city. That lake was punished, and the historian would search in vain today for the waves of one that, a child of Holland, says a poet, dared bring the enemy vessels right into the interior of the country. Nevertheless, the situation of the blockaded city became more lamentable by the day. Provisions were beginning to run short. A great many of the residents had died of hunger. The streets were full of the sick and dying. Friends of those besieged attempted several times to send them provisions, but without success. The residents then resolved to form themselves into an armed corps, to put their wives and children in the centre and to open up a passage, swords in hand, through the enemy’s lines. Only the German troops who were in the city refused to be part of so bold an enterprise. Learning of this plan, and fearing the effects of despair, the Spaniards sent a negotiator, who promised mercy and amnesty on condition that the city surrender and deliver fifty-seven of its leading members into the hands of their rightful masters. It was also agreed that the residents could redeem the pillage of their houses and their possessions by paying a sum of 24025 florins. Such harsh conditions would never have been accepted had the word ‘clemency’ not been uttered by the enemy. When the Spaniards entered the city, they found its garrison reduced from 4, to 1, men. Three days passed; people trusted the word that had been given, and the residents had laid down their arms. Suddenly, Ripperda, the Governor of the city, and the 57 noblemen who had been taken hostage, were executed. Four executioners were then enlisted for another task, and two thousand men, including soldiers of the garrison, residents of the city, and Protestant ministers, were coldly put to death. The butchery was approaching its end. The butchers were weary, and the victims remaining in the prisons were tied two by two and thrown into the Harlem lake. The siege had lasted from December 1572 to July 1573. The sad outcome of so long and valiant a resistance at first brought consternation to the United Provinces, but a cause is not lost while the sense of justice is not snuffed out. Four years later, the Dutch regained possession of Harlem. Memories of the siege are preserved in its town hall, an elegant building; there I saw, not without emotion, an old painting showing the condition of this unhappy city during the dark days in which it offered the Netherlands the example of heroic devotion. Alphonse Esquiros Midnight strikes, a flickering light shines far off over the Ocean, and a bell can be heard ringing, half lost in the great murmuring of the waves. At once, from every creek and cranny in the shore, from every rock, there emerge long, black, pointed forms that slip over the waves. They are fishing-boats, laden with men, children, women and old people, heading for the open sea. They all make for the same spot. The sound of the bell can already be heard closer, the distant light becomes more distinct and finally the object towards which this gathered crowd is making its way appears in the midst of the waves! It is a skiff, on which is standing a priest, ready to celebrate Mass. Certain that here he has only God as his witness, he has summoned the parishes to this solemn act, and all the faithful have come; all are kneeling between the sea, with its dull roaring, and the sky, dark with clouds. Imagine, if you can, such a sight! The darkness, the waves, two thousand bowed heads surrounding a man standing over the depths. The chanting of the holy office – and between each response and the next, the great threats uttered by the sea, murmuring like the voice of God. 1. Corinthians XI. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which He was betrayed took the bread. And when He had given thanks, He brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is My body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of Me. After the same manner also He took the cup, when He had supped, saying, This cup is the New Testament in My blood, this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord’s death till He come.  Scheveningen28 Holland’s coasts are hidden by ranges of dunes that deprive the traveller of the sight of the waters. After a long and arduous climb up these sandy hills, raise your eyes, and there’s the sea! This North Sea was poorly known to the ancients, who imagined it in terms of fables and superstitious terrors. Even Tacitus pictured it as being churned up by constant winds and inhabited by monsters. The fact is that its coasts are stormy, and its colour is variable; in the foreground it is a scummy yellow that looks like dirty washing water, further off, a weak green, and in the distance, a faded blue that blends into the wavy line of the sky. Here and there, great clouds cast their sombre shadows obliquely over this indistinct mirror. No rocks, no cliffs break the force of the waves: this sea rolls on its sandy bed, which it had made for itself and which it is constantly expanding. The physiognomy of Holland’s coasts varies very little: sand, and more sand, water and more water, sky and more sky. On these coasts, which give the impression of being limitless, there stand, between the mouth of the Maas and Den Helder, a number of fishing villages. The most interesting of these villages are Scheveningen and Katwijk. The beach at Scheveningen is frequented by bathers during the summer. At that time of year, a pretty village, linked with The Hague by a tree-lined road, and a promenade built of timber that disappears among the dunes, welcomes foreigners from every country. Here everything shows the effects of proximity to the Ocean. The church, which by no means lacks elegance, contains the enormous skull and a few vertebrae of a sperm whale that was cast up on the shore in a storm, in 1617. These silent fragments are like a commentary on these words of Job: ‘The monsters proclaim Thee, O Lord’. In the main street, which leads to the sea, are to be found several vendors of shellfish. This sea, whose voice can be heard, shows itself only when the traveller’s feet are almost at the water. The sudden delight of surprise, and the grandeur of the scene that then opens up, fully compensate for the gradation of effects found on other shores. A fishing fleet, whose smacks are beached on the sand, or riding at anchor, or scattered out at sea like the thoughts of the sea’s brain, associates the image of labour with historical memories. Here the Ocean must be proud of Holland and the Dutch; in 1673, De Ruyter defeated the English and French fleets within sight of Scheveningen.  And yet the main street, the baths, the cafés, the hotels – all of that is not Scheveningen. Behind some elegant dwellings, which are a true example of trompe l’oeil, are hidden narrow streets, and poor brick hovels, in which a silent and wretched population conceals itself. At the doors of these poky cubby-holes, in front of which 
       are drying washing, nets, red shirts and strings of fish threaded on a line, there appears from time to time the figure of a woman, sad, aged and wasted by fever. Children play in the midst of all this wretchedness, as if it were one of the privileges of their age to be unaware of misfortune and poverty. The fishermen’s language is a kind of patois that is fundamentally different from ordinary Dutch, and in which some linguists have believed they recognize traces of the Anglo-Saxon that seems to have been the source of the national language. Their dress, especially the women’s, is distinctive. In the winter, they wear a bodice of serge or calico, a brown serge skirt, a long cape of the same stuff and the same colour, lined in red, with a tall, stiff collar. There is something austere and monkish about this form of clothing; one must in any case admit that it is well suited to the climate and to their occupation. A large hat of coarse straw with a border of black ribbon, lined in flower-printed calico, bent slightly downward on either side and rising at the back and the front like a boat, enables them to hold up to three or four baskets on their heads. These women are tall, and robustly built, with rather plain but healthy-looking faces, blue eyes with somewhat drooping lids, and sturdy limbs. By the age of thirty they have already lost much of their freshness; their skin is weather-beaten, a condition due, no doubt, to the proximity of the sea and to their living in the dunes. The dunes form a country within the country itself; the sand reflects the sun’s rays more strongly than elsewhere; this is Holland’s Arabia. The men are comparatively short in stature; their dress – black jacket and trousers – does not suit their bearing, which is serious, but awkward. They have round faces, short necks, usually brown or curly hair. Their great treasures are their shirt-buttons and the silver buckles which they attach to their feet or their belts. This conservatism in their dress, especially the women’s, this consistency in their physical traits, these racial characteristics that are preserved due to the concern shown by the boys and girls of Scheveningen to marry only amongst themselves, are all, perhaps, a consequence of their dealings with the sea. The Ocean, in which some poets have believed they have seen an image of inconstancy, is, on the contrary, an image of Eternity; of all the elements, it is the one that has suffered the fewest vicissitudes since the beginning of the world. The dawn of creation saw it born thus, and thus it still rolls today. The ways of the fishermen who live on the coast share the nature of the Ocean. They have none of the habits of the city. The essence of their character is independence. These men have no love of the land; they need space, the free vastness of the seas, the untamed flood, the sky, blue by day, full of stars by night, the sharp north wind, the mind of a man standing upright upon the Ocean. Soldiers of toil, they love deliberately to brave the lightning’s bolt, the whinnying of the waves that run, without a bit and foaming at the mouth, about the boat’s keel. On land, they are homesick. These feelings of independence can be seen on their faces. Sailors and fishermen differ 
       from other men in the way they carry their heads high as they walk. One would at the very least say that for them was written Ovid’s line: ‘He gave man a face that looks at the sky’. This love of liberty even rubs off on their religious beliefs. As we have seen, all, or almost all, of the fishermen of the coast are Protestant; they acknowledge only two books that have the right to speak to them of God: the Bible and the sea. It appears that the Ocean exerts a moral and sanctifying effect on them. Drunkenness is rare among the fishermen of Scheveningen, but even those who drink Hollands gin to excess on land abstain from any form of intemperance when they are at sea. Swearing is unknown on board a boat. The seafaring life strengthens and increases religious feelings in men. When a fishing smack sails, each fisherman takes his Bible with him. A meal is never eaten without grace being said, and is also followed by a prayer of thanks. On Sunday, if the men are at sea, they abstain from fishing, and if they are on land, the singing of the Psalms can be heard in their little houses from morning onwards. Alphonse Esquiros. Amsterdam, 4 June 1877 My dear Theo, You remember that evening in Dordrecht when we walked through Dordrecht together, around the Grote Kerk and through all kinds of streets and along the canals with their reflections of the old houses and the lights from the windows. You spoke then (or rather it was that Sunday when you arrived) about a description of a day in London by Théophile Gautier, the coaches from a wedding before the doors of a church on a stormy and misty day. I saw it all before me, but if it struck you then you’ll also feel moved by the enclosed, I read these pages on a very stormy day last week, also with thoughts about the Queen’s illness;3 it was evening when the sun went down, casting a reddish glow on the grey evening clouds, against which the masts of the ships and the row of old houses and trees stood out, and everything was reflected in the water, and the sky cast a strange light on the black earth, the green grass with daisies and buttercups, and on the shrubs of white and purple lilacs and elderberry from the garden at the dockyard. I had read that book by Lamartine in London and it had made a deep impression on me, and did so again this time, especially those last few pages. Write and tell me what you think of it. The places spoken about: Hampton Court with its avenues of lime trees full of rookeries,a Whitehall overgrown with ivy on the back, and the inner courtyard bordering on St James’s Park where one can see Westminster Abbey &c., I see it all before me, and the weather and the sombre tone covering it all. (That’s what keeps me from sleeping!) Did you go to Etten on Sunday? I sincerely hope so, and that you had a good day; I gather this from a sentence in the last letter from Etten: ‘we expect Theo, probably this Sunday’. This evening I have to go to Uncle Stricker’s. Went to the early sermon yesterday morning, heard a sermon on the text ‘Wilt thou be made whole?’, how they that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. Afterwards I heard Uncle Stricker in the Amstelkerk that you know8 on 2 Cor. 4:18b, ‘for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal’. There was a bit at the end where he spoke passionately and cried out ‘but Charity abideth’. How we are bound to one another through God by bonds that are in God’s hand, and in those bonds lies our strength, and they are old and do not break easily. Have got a lot to do, so adieu, perhaps this evening I’ll write a few more words below. Accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Your most loving brother, Vincent Went past the flower market on Singel today, I saw such a nice thing there. A farmer was standing there with lots and lots of pots, all kinds of flowers and shrubs, the ivy was at the back, and in between sat his little girl, a child like Maris would paint, so simple, wearing a black cap, and with a pair of eyes so lively and really so friendly, she sat there knitting, the man was hawking his wares, and if I’d been able to I would gladly have bought something, and he said, also pointing unintentionally at his little daughter, ‘Doesn’t it look good?’ 5 June. Last night I was at the Strickers’, Margreet Meyboom, to whom Paul12 is engaged, was there as well. That’s a girl who’s very reminiscent of Ellen in ‘The wide, wide World’, her father was a very clever preacher, an extraordinary man and close friend of Uncle Stricker. We walked along Buitenkant and there by the sand works at the Oosterspoor, I can’t tell you how beautiful it was there in the twilight. Rembrandt, Michel and others have painted it, the ground dark, the sky still lit by the glow of the sun, already gone down, the row of houses and towers standing out above, the lights in the windows everywhere, everything reflected in the water. And the people and carriages like small black figures everywhere. Like one sometimes sees in a Rembrandt. And it put us in such a mood that we began talking about all sorts of things. Sat up late last night writing, and early this morning it was such gorgeous weather. In the evening there’s also a beautiful view of the yard, where everything is deathly still and the street-lamps are burning and the sky above full of stars. When all sounds cease – God’s voice is heard – Under the stars. Be sure to write soon and tell me whether that piece about Cromwell isn’t something right out of the heart of London. 
   Cromwell’s Youth16  It did not take long for his family to fall from its position of wealth. He retired to a small estate which he owned in the Huntingdon fens. The poor, harsh, desolate surroundings of this watery region, the monotonous horizon, the filthy river, the overcast sky, the spindly trees, the few scattered cottages, the rude manners of the inhabitants were of a kind to concentrate and to darken the young man’s character. The souls of places seem to enter the souls of men; often from a barren, dreary region there emerges a lively, ardent and profound faith. As the place, so the man. The soul is a mirror first, and only then a seat of feeling. A family misfortune affected Cromwell during this period of ascendancy in his life, when we are surprised to see tears in the eyes of a man who had watched dry-eyed the ill-fated Charles I torn from his children’s arms to die. He lost his mother, aged ninety-four. She was this Elizabeth Stuart, blood-daughter of the kings whom her son had dethroned, a biblical woman, mother of a large family, the wellspring of their piety, the nursemaid of their virtues, the living inspiration of their passion for the religious liberty of their sect; while in the full possession of her faculties, she enjoyed earthly glory, but most of all the heavenly glory of the greatest of her sons, the Maccabeus of her faith. Cromwell, as he wielded supreme power, cherished and venerated her as the root of his heart and of his destiny. My Lord Protector’s mother, wrote Cromwell’s private secretary, Thurloe, in that year of 1654, died last night almost a century old. Moments before she expired, she asked for her son to be called to her bedside, and giving her blessing with her hand, she said to him ‘May the Lord constantly make the splendour of His face to shine upon you, my son! May He sustain you in all your adversities! May He make your strength equal to the great things the Highest has charged you to accomplish for the glory of His Holy name and for the salvation of His people! My dear son, she continued, emphasizing the name that was her glory in her last moments, my dear son, I leave my spirit and my heart with thee! Farewell! Farewell!’ And she fell back, says Thurloe, in her final slumber. Cromwell burst into tears like a man who seemed to have lost part of the light that illuminated him in his darkness. His mother who loved him as a son and venerated him as God’s elect, resided with him in the royal palace of Whitehall, but she lived in a bare, secluded apartment in the palace. Not wishing, she said, to appropriate unto herself and to her other children that glory to which the Lord had condemned her son, but which was no more than the temporary furnishings of an inn, to which she wished to attach neither her heart, nor the future existence of her family. Keen anxieties troubled her days and nights in that palace of kings, where she missed her rural farm in Wales. Cromwell gave his mother a queen’s funeral, a sign rather of filial piety than of ostentation. She was buried among the ashes of royalty and illustrious men, beneath the parvis of Westminster, that Saint Denis of Britain’s royal houses and great men. Hampton Court, the magnificent feudal residence of Henry VIII, was an abode which, in its gloomy monastic grandeur, ought to have pleased Cromwell. The palace, flanked by broad, squat towers like the bastions of a fortress, is crowned with crenellations constantly blackened with flocks of crows (rooks). It was built on the edge of those deep forests, one of earth’s extravagances dear to the Saxon race. The ancient oaks of its vast park seem to assume the majesty of a royal plantation to match the castle’s Gothic towers. Long avenues veiled in shadow and mist afford no view other than green lawns crossed in silence by herds of tame fallow deer. Low, narrow doors with pointed arches, like the mouths of caves in a formation of rocks, give access to underground chambers, guardrooms and vaulted halls, hung with an array of ancient arms and armour. Everything there exudes that shadowy sovereign power that creates an empty space around kings, whether out of respect or terror. Hampton Court was Cromwell’s favourite residence, but at that moment it was pain as much as relaxation that detained him there. His first love, the love of nature in the countryside and the animals that give it life, was the last to die in him. The gentleman farmer was still to be found behind the master of an empire. The Bible and the patriarchal life, of which the Bible constantly speaks, were associated in his imagination with his memories and rural activities, which he missed even in his palaces. He often said: Happy he who lives under the thatch and tills his field. At Hampton Court, a lingering and recurrent fever seized hold of him. He braved the first bouts without anyone around him suspecting the seriousness of his illness. The fever became tertian and more acute; doctors summoned from London attributed it to the marshy air of the poorly embanked sides of the Thames, at the bottom of Hampton Court’s gardens. It rapidly consumed his strength. 
   He was taken back to the palace of Whitehall, as though it had been decreed by Providence that he should die before the same window in the same palace where, at his wish, the scaffold of his victim, the king, had been erected ten years previously. Cromwell was never again to rise from the royal bed in which he was laid on his return to London. The things he did and said during his long illness have been misrepresented or interpreted a thousand times, at the will of those who had reason to seek revenge for his life or to enhance their own position through his death. A new, authentic and invaluable document, the notes taken unbeknownst to him, hour by hour and sigh by sigh, by the groom of his bedchamber, who was at his service day and night, makes us privy to his every word and thought. Words spoken at this hour of death are thought’s secrets. Death removes the mask from every face, and there is no hypocrisy beneath the raised hand of God. Between his bouts of fever he filled his hours reading holy books and dwelling, sometimes in despair and sometimes with resignation, on his daughter’s death. Read to me, he said to his wife, on one such occasion, the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Philippians. She read these words: I have learned to be satisfied in whatever tribulation God casts me, I have learned to know the two fortunes, the excess of abasements and the excess of abundance. I can face both the one and the other with the strength of the God Who sustains me. The reader stopped. This verse, said Cromwell, once saved my life, at the time when the death of my firstborn, little Oliver, pierced my heart like a dagger. Ah, Saint Paul, he went on, you had the right to speak thus, you had measured yourself beside grace, but I!... Then, rallying, in a tone of reflective confidence, after a brief silence: But he Who was the Christ of Saint Paul, he said, is he not mine also? They prayed for him in the three kingdoms: Puritans for their prophet, republicans for their champion, and patriots for the mainstay of their country. Antechambers echoed to the ceaseless, muffled murmur of ministers, preachers, chaplains, visionaries, mystics, friends of his person and of his family, offering up their groans to God in order to redeem the life of their saint. Whitehall was more like a shrine than a palace, and the same spirit of mystical inspiration which had brought him to this dwelling-place at the beginning was bursting forth at his end. He talked only of devotion, never of policy; by so much more did the thought of salvation weigh with him than the thought of prolonging his power. He had named his son Richard as his successor, in a document which had been sealed and mislaid on the day he was named Protector. Those around him would have wished him to repeat this act; but he showed either indifference or repugnance towards doing so. At last, when he was asked before witnesses if it were not true that it was his wish that Richard should succeed him: Yes, he stammered, nodding his head in assent. And he immediately changed the subject. It was clear that this man, broken by the vicissitudes of empires and the fickleness of peoples, set little store by a dictator’s testaments, and relied on Providence to determine the fate of the dictatorship after him. God will govern through the instrument that it pleases Him to choose, he said; who was it who gave me authority over his people? He believed he had deposited this document at Hampton Court, people went to look for it, but found nothing, and it was not mentioned again. Richard, who was still living in the country at his wife’s father’s house, arrived in London with his sisters and brothers-in-law, to gather around the deathbed of the head of the family. He himself appeared to have no more illusions than his father as to the hereditary nature of his power. He had neither the inclination nor the ambition for it. The whole family, whom the Protector had consigned to private life and to the mediocrity of life in the community, seemed prepared happily to return to it, like actors leaving the stage after the play. They had brought neither hatred nor envy upon themselves through their arrogance or their pride. The mutual tenderness, and the tears, of this family, children of Sulla, who could mingle with impunity in the crowd, were the only funereal pomp around the Protector’s bed. ‘Do not weep thus,’ he said on one occasion to his wife and children, who were sobbing in his bedchamber, ‘do not love this vain and empty world; I say this to you from the brink of my tomb, do not love this world.’ And yet there was a moment when he seemed to feel some weakness for life. Is there no one here who could bring me out of danger? There was no reply. Men can do nothing, he continued, God may do what He will! Ah well, is there no one who will pray with me? The silence on his lips was broken from time to time by mystical yearnings and by mutterings, and one could hear the sounds of the inner prayer. 
   Lord, Thou art my witness that, if I desire to live, it is in order to glorify Thy name and to perform Thy works. It is terrible, he murmured three times in succession, to fall into the hands of the living God! Do you believe, he said to his chaplain, that man can ever lose the state of grace before God once he has been raised to it? No, replied the chaplain, the state of grace does not allow of the possibility of lapsing from it. ‘Well,’ replied Cromwell, ‘then I am happy, because I am sure that I have been in a perfect state of grace at a certain time in my life.’ All his problems were of the life to come, none of this present life. I am the least of men, he continued a moment later, but I have loved God, praised God, or rather, I am beloved of God! There was a moment when the crisis of his illness was believed to have passed, and when he believed it himself. Whitehall and its churches resounded with thanksgiving. This moment was brief; the fever doubled in intensity. He had days and nights of calm enfeeblement and of wandering delirium. On the morning of August 30th, one of the officers, looking out of the window, recognized Captain Ludlow, exiled from London, passing by. Cromwell, informed of Ludlow’s presence, became anxious about what was making him bold enough to show himself in the capital and to walk beneath his windows. He feared an outburst of republicanism, calculated to erupt as he breathed his last. He sent his son Richard to Ludlow to probe the republicans’ secret intention. Ludlow assured Richard that he had come to London on private business only, and that when he came he did not even know of the Protector’s illness. He promised to leave the same day. This is the same Ludlow who, banished as a regicide shortly after Cromwell’s death, departed to grow old and die, impenitent for that murder, at Vevay, on the shores of Lake Geneva, where his tomb may be seen. Reassured as to the republicans’ intentions, Cromwell concerned himself only with making his death holy. The groom of his bedchamber, who kept vigil over him, heard him uttering his last prayer aloud in disjointed verses. For his own edification, he made a note of the words as they escaped from the lips of the dying Protector, and imparted them to history long afterwards:  Lord, I am a miserable creature. But I am in Thy truth through Thy grace and I hope to appear before Thee for this people. Thou hast created me, though unworthy, to be the instrument of some good here on earth and of some service to my brethren. Many of them have had of me too superior a notion of my strengths, others will rejoice at my death. This is of no import, o God! Continue to shower Thy succour upon them, give them constancy and uprightness of judgement, through them make the name of Christ ever more glorious in the world, teach those who placed too great reliance in Thy instrument to place their faith in Thee alone! Pardon those who are eager to trample this worm under foot! And give me a good night if it be Thy pleasure! On the following day, the anniversary of the battles of Dunbar and Worcester, his greatest triumphs, the noise of military fanfares in celebration of these victories rose into his apartments. I should like, he cried, to live long enough to render similar service to this people, but my day is done. May God always be with His children! After a final night of agony and sleeplessness, he was asked if he wished to drink or to sleep. Neither to drink nor to sleep now, he replied, but to go speedily to my Father. At sunrise he lost the power of speech, but could be seen still praying in a low voice. The equinoctial gales, which had been blowing since the previous day, at that moment turned into a storm so violent that it resembled an earthquake. Carriages bringing to London the Protector’s friends, who had been warned of the extremity of his peril, could not make headway against the wind, and sought refuge at roadside inns. The tall London houses seemed to sway like ships on the waves. Roofs were carried away and centuries-old trees in Hyde Park torn up by the roots and swept along the ground, with all their leaves, like tufts of grass. Cromwell expired at two o’clock in the afternoon, in the midst of this upheaval of nature. The storm carried him off as it had brought him in. The people saw a wonder in this convulsion of the atmosphere with the final convulsion of their prophet. A. de Lamartine — Cromwell. Amsterdam, 12 June 1877 My dear Theo, I received your letter of 7 June and was glad to see that you were in Etten and had a good Sunday there, it’s nice that Pa and little brother1 brought you as far as Dordrecht. And then you wrote about how you spoke at home of your plans for the future, when I read it, my heart spilled over for you, as it were, it seems very good to me. Launch out into the deep. What I hope now is only this – that you go to London before you see Paris. But we have to wait and see what happens. I’ve loved so much about those two cities, I think back on them with a feeling of nostalgia, and I’d almost like to go with you, if I’m ever far enough along to be permitted to fill a position in that great Dutch Church, then those memories will one day provide subjects for sermons, go onward in belief and with the faith of old, you and I; who knows whether we’ll shake each other’s hand again as I remember Pa and Uncle Jan doing at that little church in Zundert, once when Uncle came back from travelling and much had happened in both their lives, and they now felt firm ground beneath their feet, as it were. Be sure and write as soon as you hear any more about this, I hope that we’ll have a quiet moment together sometime before you leave. Even though there seems to be no opportunity at present, such a thing may soon come about. But I repeat, brother, my heart spills over for you, I think the plan is very good – my past comes completely alive again now that I’m thinking of your future. ‘Behold, I make all things new’5 will perhaps soon be your experience. Be blessed these days. Take a good look at the things around you – don’t forget them – walk through the land again, as it says: in the length of it and in the breadth of it. I have a lot to do every day, so the time goes quickly and the days are almost too short, even though I stretch them out a bit, I have such a great desire to progress and also to know the Bible well and thoroughly, and also to know many things, such as what I wrote to you about Cromwell. ‘No day without a line’, daily writing, reading, working and practising, with meekness and perseverance, will surely lead to something. 
   This week I went to the cemetery here, outside the Muiderpoort, there’s a small wood in front of it9 where it’s beautiful, especially in the evening when the sun shines through the leaves, there are also a lot of beautiful graves and all kinds of evergreens, and roses and forget-me-nots bloom there. Also took another walk to the Zuiderzee, which is 40 minutes from here, over a dyke from which one sees meadows everywhere and farms which always remind me of etchings by Rembrandt. It’s a beautiful city, this, today I again saw a corner for Thijs Maris or Allebé, namely houses behind the Oosterkerk, on a small inner courtyard, I had to see the sexton10 to ask about Uncle’s place in the church and I was in his house, also living there is a shoemaker &c., but one finds it everywhere, the world is full of it, may our own heart be filled with it and become so more and more. When I saw that sexton I couldn’t help thinking of a wood engraving, by Rethel I think, you must know it too, ‘Death as a friend’. I always found that scene very moving, in London in those days one saw it in front of nearly all the print-shop windows. It has a pendant, Cholera in Paris, and that dance of death is also by Rethel. Heard the Rev. Laurillard on Sunday morning in the early sermon14 on ‘Jesus went through the cornfields’. He made a deep impression on me – he also spoke in that sermon about the parable of the sower16 and about the man who cast seed into the ground, and he should sleep, and rise day and night, and the seed should spring and increase and grow up, he knoweth not how, he also spoke about the funeral in the cornfield by Van der Maaten. The sun shone through the windows – there weren’t that many people in the church, mostly labourers and women. Afterwards I heard Uncle Stricker in the Oosterkerk20 on ‘praise, not of men but of God’, also occasioned by the death of H.M. On Monday Aunt Mina and Margreet Meyboom left for Etten, and I saw them at the station of the Oosterspoor. While I was waiting for them there, I read the following in Lamennais:24 At the head of a small inlet beneath a cliff hollowed out at its foot by the waves, among rocks from which hung long strands of sea-green weed, two men, one young, the other old but still sturdy, leaning against a fishing-boat, waited for the tide that was slowly coming in, barely ruffled by a dying breeze. Swelling as they neared the shore, the waves slid lazily over the sand with a faint and gentle murmur. A little later, the boat could be seen moving away from the shore towards the open sea, its prow raised, leaving behind it a ribbon of white foam. The old man, beside the tiller, watched the sails as they filled, then drooped like weary wings. His gaze then seemed to look for a sign on the horizon and in the dense, motionless clouds. Then, as he sank back into his thoughts, one read on his tanned brow an entire life of toil and unremitting struggle from which he had never flinched. The ebb tide created small valleys in the calm sea, where the hen petrel played, balancing gracefully on the glistening, lead-hued waves. From high in the air the seagull dived into them like an arrow, and on the black tip of a rock the ungainly cormorant stood motionless. The slightest movement, a faint breath of air, 
   a streak of light, altered the aspect of these changing scenes. The young man, withdrawn into himself, saw them as one sees in dreams. His soul drifted and floated to the sound of the wake, like the light, monotonous sound with which the nurse sends the child to sleep. Suddenly, coming out of his reverie, his eyes light up, the air echoes to the sound of his resonant voice: To the ploughman the fields, to the huntsman the woods, to the fisherman the sea and its waves, and its reefs and its storms. The sky above his head, the depths beneath his feet, he is free, he has no master but himself. See her obey his hand, see her leap across the moving plains, the frail vessel into which the wind breathes life. He contends with the waves and subdues them, he contends with the wind and tames it. Who is as strong, who is as great as he? Where are the boundaries of his domains? Has anyone ever found them? Wherever the Ocean pours itself forth, God has said to him: Go, this is thine. His nets gather a living harvest in the depths of the waters. He has flocks beyond number which grow fat for him in pastures covered by the seas. Flowers — purple, blue, yellow, crimson, open in their bosom, and to charm his eye, the clouds present him with vast shores, beautiful azure lakes, wide rivers, mountains and valleys and fantastic cities, now plunged in shadow, now lit by all the glory of the setting sun. Oh, how sweet it is to me, the fisherman’s life! How its harsh battles and its manly joys delight me. And yet, my mother, when at night the squall suddenly shakes our cabin, what fear grips your heart! See you rise, all trembling, to invoke the holy Virgin who protects poor sailors! Kneeling before her image, your tears flow for your son, driven in the darkness by the whirlwind towards the reefs, where the moans of the dead are heard, mingling with the voice of the storm. Protect us, O Lord, for our barks are so small and Thy sea is so great. A terrible storm blew up here this morning at quarter to 5, a little while later the first stream of workers came through the gate of the dockyard in the pouring rain. Got up and went into the yard and took a couple of notebooks to the cupola26 and sat there reading and looking round the whole yard and dock, the poplars and elders and other shrubs were bent by the strong wind, and the rain pelted on the wood-piles and the decks of the ships, sloops and a little steamboat went back and forth in the distance, near the village on the other side of the IJ, one saw brown sails passing quickly and the houses and trees on Buitenkant and churches in more vivid colours. Again and again one heard thunder and saw lightning, the sky looked like a painting by Ruisdael, and the gulls were flying low over the water. It was a magnificent sight, and really refreshing after the oppressive heat of yesterday. It has refreshed me, because I was awfully tired when I went upstairs yesterday evening. Paid a visit yesterday to the Rev. Meijjes and his wife, because Pa had told me to do this, and I had tea with them. When I arrived, His Reverence was taking his afternoon nap and I was requested to go for a half-hour walk, which I did, fortunately I had that little book by Lamennais in my pocket and I read under the trees lining the canals, where the evening sun was reflected in the dark water. Then I went back, and they made me think of ‘Winter’ by Thorvaldsen. One nevertheless sees it much more beautifully in Pa and Ma, but as I said, it was like that here, too. 
   The days fly past, I’m four years older than you and I feel that they probably go by faster for me than for you, but I fight against it by stretching them out a bit in the mornings and evenings. Will you write again soon? It’s a pity that Mager30 isn’t coming after all. The weather has cleared up again, and the sky is blue and the sun is shining brightly and the birds are singing, there are rather a lot of them at the yard, and all kinds, in the evenings I always walk up and down there with the dog, often thinking of that poem ‘Under the stars’. When all sounds cease, God’s voice is heard, under the stars. The roses growing against the house are also blooming, and in the garden the elderberry and jasmine. Recently went to the Trippenhuis32 again to see whether those rooms, which were closed when we were there together, had been put back in order, but it will probably take another fortnight before one can go in again. There were a lot of foreigners at the time, French and English, hearing them speak revives a lot of memories in me. Yet I don’t regret being back here. ‘Life hath quicksands, life hath snares’33 are true words. How is Mrs Tersteeg? If you run into Mauve or go to see him, give him my regards, also to everyone at the Haanebeeks’ and Rooses’. Now I must get to work, don’t have any lessons today, but on the other hand 2 hours tomorrow morning, so have really a lot to do. I’ve worked my way through the history of the Old Testament up to Samuel, this evening I’ll start with Kings, when that work is finished, it will be a valuable thing to have. As I sit here writing I cannot help making a little drawing now and then, like the one I sent you recently, and like the one I made this morning of Elijah35 in the desert with stormy skies and a couple of thorn-bushes in the foreground, it’s nothing special, but sometimes I see it all so clearly in my mind’s eye, and I believe that at such moments I should be able to talk about it passionately, may it later be granted me to do so. I wish you the very best, if you ever go to the Scheveningen Bosjes or to the beach, give them my regards. When you next come here I’ll be able to show you some beautiful spots here as well. Every day on my way to Mendes36 I have to pass through the Jewish quarter. Should like you to hear the Rev. Laurillard too, one day. And now, adieu, a handshake in thought from Your loving brother, Vincent Amsterdam, 9 July 1877 My dear Theo, Well, what do you say about Anna? It surprised me, and it seems to be serious too, and will certainly take place, one would venture to say. It could be good. The difficulties of holding a subordinate position, especially when one perseveres in it for a longer period, as she has in fact done for years in all honour and virtue, are very great and sometimes become a hard struggle, and the seemingly easy becomes extremely difficult. There’s nevertheless much poetry in it, and such years are a treasure not easily lost, and when one denies and humbles oneself, especially the first time, one has a wonderful feeling of inner peace, but I would understand very well if the future was sometimes dark for her too – it might be sensible of her, for her part, to have already decided to take this step. And I also maintain that she truly loves him, I believe that and trust in it absolutely, otherwise things wouldn’t have gone this far. And so I sincerely hope that she won’t be disappointed but that this, with God’s guidance, will be the path to her lasting happiness. May the Lord grant that she find peace, that dear sister, and bless her, and give her good things in life. On this occasion I congratulate you, too, as I have Anna and Pa and Ma. How are you, old chap? I had wanted to write to you earlier and answer your last letter. I have a lot to do and the work isn’t easy.
   Then again, I go to church a lot, there are beautiful old churches here, and outstanding preachers, I often hear Uncle Stricker, and what he says is very good, and he speaks with much warmth and feeling. I’ve heard the Rev. Laurillard three times, you would like him too, because he paints, as it were, and his work is at once lofty and noble art. He has the feeling of an artist in the true sense of the word, as someone like Andersen had when he says, for example: Every evening came the moon and whispered in my ear, Telling of the quiet night and what its eye Had lit on from its watch-post in the sky. It who knows centuries – through ages did it roam, Casting, high above the Flood and crest of foam, On the floating ark a soft silver glow, Just as it now lights my lonely window Then, too, when the folk of Israel knelt down To weep by the waters of Babylon It illumined with sad twinkling down below The unstrung harp, hanging on the willow. The moon still shines now, and the sun and the evening star, which is fortunate, and they often speak of God’s Love and call to mind the words, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Am busy making a summary of the history of the Reformation, there’s much that is stimulating and appealing in the history of those days. The room in the Trippenhuis where Rembrandt’s Syndics are hanging is open again; coming from church yesterday I walked over there for a while, hanging right next to the Rembrandt is that portrait by Van der Helst. Adieu, Theo, a hearty handshake in thought, I wish you the very best, and believe that often thinking of you is Your most loving brother Vincent Herewith a small contribution for your scrapbook, is it coming along? Give my regards to your housemates and if someone or other should ask after me. Amsterdam, Sunday, 15 July 1877 My dear Theo, I feel the need to write to you again, let me have a word from you too, if you have time. This morning I went to the early sermon, and the text was Eph. 5:14, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. When I left here it was raining, and also when leaving the church, though during the sermon the sun had been shining brightly through the windows. Pa had to lead the early service today in Etten, and afterwards Pa had to go to Zundert. After that I heard dear Uncle Stricker in the Oudezijdskapel2 on the words ‘Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees’, which is a warning not to become too attached to outward forms and ceremonies without truly sincere religious feeling of the heart, as opposed to a life without belief in the things that are higher than those in this life. There were very few people in the church, apart from the orphan boys and orphan girls with their red and black clothes, who filled a large part of the little old church nonetheless. If you come here again I hope to take you there, that Oudezijdskapel is in a very narrow street, Zeedijk, near the part of Buitenkant called ‘the old tar-yards’5 and near Warmoesstraat. It’s a very nice part of town and reminds one of the heart of London, like Booksellers’ Row6 or some such place. May it be granted me in time to speak as I have heard so many do, and hear each Sunday again. I’m doing my best to become skilled at it with all the power in me. Last week I spent an evening at the old Rev. Meijjes’s and met his son there, the Rev. Jeremie Meijjes with his wife, a daughter of Professor Tilanus, and two of his sons – one of them attends the gymnasium here and the other is training to be an engineer. The latter helped to build those roofs here at the dockyard (underneath which the ships are built, where we went with Uncle that afternoon you were here), as well as the new Kattenburg bridge. It was a pleasant evening and we talked about all kinds of foreign matters. He’s a very gifted man and has a pure talent and a great faith, heard him in the Westerkerk. Saw him coming from the pulpit and walking through the church after the sermon, and that tall, noble figure and that tired, pale face and that noble head, the hair already showing some grey, made a great impression on me. To be tired in such a way from that work, that is a blessing. Today you’ll perhaps go to Scheveningen, have a good Sunday, how I’d like to visit your little room. Heard from home that you’ll probably go to see Mauve again soon in his house in the dunes, and will stay overnight, I can imagine you sitting there, and I also know what you’ll discuss. Last week Mendes told me about a very interesting part of the city, namely the area extending from the Leidsepoort (thus close to Vondelpark) to the Hollandsche Spoor station. Went there yesterday, I knew part of it already, and you do too, I think, namely the part near the 
   station. There are a great many mills, saw-mills, workers’ houses with little gardens, old houses too, of all kinds, and very populous, and the area is criss-crossed by all kinds of small canals and waterways full of barges, and all kinds of picturesque bridges and so on. It must certainly be a wonderful thing to be a minister in such a district. This study is difficult, old chap, but I must persevere, and to that end may He help me of Whom it is written: If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. Ma wrote in her last letter something about ‘Anna’s house’, which is a new expression that doesn’t sound bad, she’ll perhaps be very happy one of these days, may she have made a good choice and one not to be repented of. The best we can do for the time being is, I think, simply be very happy about it. If you should happen to visit Mauve and Jet one of these days, give them my warm regards and spend some pleasant hours together, and bid good-day to the dunes and the sea for me. And tell Mauve that the photograph of his drawing, the plough in the field, is hanging in my little room and constantly reminds me of him. Are you reading something beautiful? I’d like so much to start reading a great many books but may not, if you can get hold of John Halifax15 do read it again, even though we read it with nostalgia, still, let us not say ‘that is not for me’, because it’s good to go on believing in everything that’s good and noble. I heard that the man whose life and character prompted the book to be written died recently, he was called Harper and ran a large bookshop in London. I once met the painter Millais on the street in London, just after I had been so happy to see various of his paintings, and that noble figure made me think of John Halifax. Millais once painted The lost penny, a young woman looking in the early morning twilight for the penny she has lost (there’s an engraving of it, the lost mite)18 and not the least beautiful of his work is an autumn landscape, Chill October. Adieu, old chap, accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me, after giving my regards to your housemates, in haste, because I have to go to church, Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 27 July 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, I heard from home that you’ve already been to Mauve’s, that was undoubtedly a good day, I’ll certainly hear about it sometime, when the opportunity arises. Herewith a contribution for your collection, namely three lithographs after Bosboom2 and two by J. Weissenbruch, found them this morning at a Jewish bookseller’s. Is that one after Bosboom the church in Scheveningen? The other is the Grote Kerk in Breda, the third after his painting that was at the large exhibition in Paris. Those two after Weissenbruch moved me – perhaps you already have them, but then again possibly not. Do go on collecting such prints, and books too. I’m now collecting Latin and Greek themes and all kinds of writings on history and so on. Am working on one on the Reformation that’s getting rather long. Recently spoke to a young man who had just done his entrance examination for the Leiden college with a good result – it isn’t easy, he told me what they asked him, but I do keep up my courage, and with God’s help I’ll pass them, and the following examinations as well. Mendes has given me every reason to believe that at the end of three months we’ll be as far as he imagined we would be if everything went well. Still, Greek lessons in the heart of Amsterdam, in the heart of the Jewish quarter on a very warm and oppressive summer afternoon, with the feeling hanging over me that many difficult examinations will have to be taken, set by very learned and cunning professors, are rather more oppressive than a walk on the beach or in the Brabant wheatfields, which will certainly be beautiful now, on a day like that. But we must ‘strive on’ through everything, as Uncle Jan says. A couple of days ago a couple of children fell into the water near the Kattenburg bridge. Uncle saw it and commandeered the sloop of the Makasser that is in dock here. A little boy was pulled out; I went along with two ship’s doctors whom Uncle had sent over, and the men carrying the boy into a chemist’s shop made every effort to resuscitate the child, but to no avail. In the meantime it was recognized by the father, who’s a stoker at the dockyard, and the little body was taken home in a woollen blanket. The search went on for an hour and a half, as it was thought that a girl had fallen in as well, though happily that seems not to be the case. In the evening I went back to see the people, it was then already dark in the house, the little body lay so still on a bed in a side room, he was such a sweet little boy. There was great sorrow, that child was the light of that house, as it were, and that light had now been put out. Even though coarse people express their grief in a coarse way and without dignity, as the mother did, among others, still, one feels a great deal in such a house of mourning, and the impression stayed with me the whole evening when I took a walk. Last Sunday morning I made a nice excursion, namely first to the early sermon, the Rev. Posthumus Meijjes in the Noorderkerk, then to Bickerseiland, where I walked on the dyke along the IJ until it was time for church again, and then to the Eilandskerk where Uncle Stricker preached. Thus the time passes, and quickly too, already we’re almost at the end of the week again.
   How are you, old chap? So very often, daily, do I think of you. God help us, struggling, to stay on top, it is good that you associate with good artists; I, too, still cling to the memory of many of them. Overcome evil with good, it is written, and one can seek to do it – and to this end God can help and make our days bearable with much good in the meantime, and preserve us from too much self-reproach. When Uncle Jan commandeered the sloop and the doctors to go and help on the afternoon that accident happened, I saw him in his element. Now I must get to work, though I still have to fill this page. Anna is in Leiden, as you surely know, and will come here one of these days with our future brother-in-law, am looking forward to seeing them very much, Pa wrote so cheerfully about last Sunday when they were in Etten and everything was good in his eyes, and they see rightly, so let us view what has happened to our sister as a blessing on our house, in which we all share; if one member be glad, let all the members be glad with her. Next week, or perhaps even tomorrow, Uncle and Aunt Pompe16 are coming to stay here, and also Fanny and Bet ’s Graeuwen, it’s been a long time since I’ve seen any of them. Am quite often up rather early in the morning, and when the sun rises over the yard and the workers come a while later it’s a wonderful sight from the window, and I should wish to have you here. Will I later be working on such a morning on a sermon on ‘He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good’, or on ‘Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light’, or on ‘It is a good thing to praise the Lord in the morning’20 and ‘It is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold the sun’21 – I hope so. All the same, it seems that the sun never shines so beautifully as it does in a parsonage or in a church. It’s wonderful to work on ‘the writings’ early in the morning. If you have the time and a stamp and paper, then write again soon. Uncle Jan sends you his regards, that evening you described there in the dunes must have been pleasant. In Uncle Cor’s shop I recently saw The Gospels by Bida, how beautiful it is, how wonderful it must be to be a Christian labourer23 like that, but it’s impossible to put into words how beautiful it is, that’s it24 again, there is much in that work that reminds one of Rembrandt. And now a handshake in thought, and I sincerely wish you the best, and believe me ever Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 3 Aug. 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, which I was happy to receive and for which I heartily thank you. What you write about Mr Tersteeg’s loss, that his youngest child has died, moved me, and I felt the need to start corresponding with him again. Yesterday a letter from Anna, who arrives today at 12:45 with Van Houten, am very much looking forward to meeting them, he seems to have made a good impression on you, as he did on everyone at home, we must simply consider it an asset. So you were at Mauve’s and had a good time there, did you draw anything while you were there? I was also in Weissenbruch’s studio once, a couple of days before my first trip to London, and the recollection of what I saw there in the way of studies and paintings is still very clear, as is that of the man himself. When next you write, tell me something about the exhibition that will have opened yesterday, how much the artists would be able to find here at the dockyard that’s fit to be painted. The Rev. Meijjes was here a few days ago with 2 of his sons, and Uncle gave us permission to go and see the yard and the workshops, the forges and so on were of course in use, everything was standing still that Sunday we were there together. Was also with Uncle Pompe and Jan5 on the guard-ship the Wassenaar, which is also very interesting. This week the house here was full of people, Uncle and Aunt Pompe and Jan, Uncle Cor and Vincent, Fanny and Bet ’s Graeuwen and Bertha van Gogh8 from Haarlem, the last is a very sweet girl. Went last Sunday to the early sermon given by the Rev. Hasebroek, and again in the morning to that Oudezijdskapel I already told you about. The Rev. Van Marken10 preached very beautifully on Matth. IX:9 &c. Jesus saw a man, named Matthew, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him, Follow Me, and in the next part of that chapter: Jesus ate with publicans and sinners. They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. So day by day I do my best to settle in, especially in Latin and Greek, and have already written quite a few themes, composed of phrases that remind me of the old school-days, such as ‘Which eminent philosopher was sentenced to death by the Athenians? The very good and wise Socrates. Our life is very similar to a journey, and open to very many and very great catastrophes and accidents. The nature of Odysseus, and the grapes of the vineyard’. I was up early this morning, it had rained a lot during the night, but the sun broke through the clouds very early, the ground and the piles of timber and beams in the yard were drenched, and the sky reflected in the puddles was completely golden due to the rising sun, and at 5 o’clock one saw all those hundreds of workers looking like little black figures fanning out on all sides. I go to Uncle Stricker’s study quite a lot. He’s very clever and has lots of beautiful books, and he has a great love for his work and his position. Got a very cheerful letter last Monday from Pa in Helvoirt. I heard from home that you got a bill from Dr Coster14 for 40 guilders, that’s rather a burden, and paying it will remind you of the feeling one has when a tooth is pulled, if only I could help you, but you know that I have neither gold nor silver. I often have to use my cunning to get money for the collection at church, for example by exchanging stamps for cents at a tobacconist’s, but old boy, struggling we stay on top, and you know that it is said of the poor in the kingdom of heaven that they are blessed.
   Every time I see Uncle Vincent19 I’m moved by something indescribably kind and, I might say, something good and spirited in him, I don’t know what it is, Pa has much more of it still, and Uncle Jan has it in another form, and it’s in Uncle Cor as well, among a hundred people one wouldn’t always find even one who calls them to mind, do let us preserve their image and their memory. Could it be that which Fénelon describes as follows in his Télémaque? The man to whom he had by chance presented himself was a stranger, who had an air of majesty, and yet something that was sad and downcast; at times he appeared dreamy, at others he had something that was either very determined or excited and agitated. At first he hardly listened to Telemachus’s question, but at last he replied: You are not mistaken, Ulysses was received at the home of King Alcinous, as in a place where God is feared and hospitality is practised, but he is no longer there, and you would search for him in vain; he has departed for Ithaca, if indeed the angry Gods21 eventually permit him to see his household deities again. Telemachus looked at him intently; the longer he looked, the more moved and astonished he was. This stranger, he said to Mentor, answered me like a man who scarcely listens to what is said to him, and who is full of bitterness. I pity the unfortunate since I have become one of them, and I feel that my heart is drawn toward this man, without knowing why. He did not receive me well; he hardly deigned to listen to me, or to reply. And so Mentor said to him, I am not at all astonished, my dear Telemachus, to see you thus moved; the cause of your pain, who is a stranger to you, is not so to Mentor, it is nature that speaks and makes itself felt, it is nature that softens your heart. The stranger who caused you such strong emotion is the great Ulysses. He is sailing straight to Ithaca, he is already very close to port, and at last he sees again those places so long yearned for. Your eyes saw him, but without knowing him; soon you will see him and you will know him — and he will know you, but now the Gods could not allow you to acknowledge each other, away from Ithaca. His heart was no less moved than yours; he is too wise to reveal himself to any mortal, in a place where he could be exposed to treachery. Ulysses, your father, is the wisest of all men; his heart is like a deep well, its secret could not be drawn from it. He loves truth, and never says aught that might wound it, but he speaks it only out of necessity, and wisdom, like a seal, ever keeps his lips closed to needless words. How moved he was when speaking to you! What violence did he do himself, so as in no wise to disclose himself! What did he not suffer, seeing you? That is what made him sad and downcast. And now, old chap, a hearty handshake in thought, let us but keep our faith in God and continue to worship what we know, give my regards to those at Mauve’s and anyone else you might see, especially your housemates, I wish you the very best, I sincerely hope you find a way of paying that bill, adieu and believe me Your most loving brother, Vincent Amsterdam, 5 Aug. 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of yesterday, it was a good one, the kind that is of some use, and it was a real comfort to me. Anna left again yesterday for Hengelo, they had a lot to do here, of course, so I wasn’t with them so very much, she also came to my little study in the evening just as it was growing dark and people were leaving the dockyard to go home. It seems to me that that face and those eyes of Van Houten speak of heart and character, and he has entirely the appearance of a man of affairs, has – it appeared to me – something decisive and abrupt which often stems from a firm will and understanding acquired through experience, may she have made a good choice and may time turn that into the love that never faileth2 but brings our dear sister through life, covering and forbearing everything and making whole hope and faith. I found a couple of stamps enclosed in your letter, for which I sincerely thank you, you also said you would send a postal order so that I could come to The Hague and see the exhibition of drawings. The postal order indeed arrived today, Sunday morning, I thank you for it and for your kind offer, but I’m sending the money back and am not coming, however much I’d like to see all the beautiful and interesting things you wrote about. Have already refused to go to Baarn, first of all because I’d rather spend my Sunday here going to church several times, and writing and studying some more, secondly because I’d have to ask for travelling money from Uncle Stricker, who has some money of Pa’s to be put at my disposal if necessary, and I hope to go on doing that as little as possible. If I go to The Hague, then I have to go to Baarn as well, and not just once – in any case, it’s better I don’t. Moreover, old boy, I know you really need it yourself. Many thanks all the same. I’m not sorry not always to have money in my pocket. I have a great craving for so many things, and if I had money perhaps I’d quickly spend it on books and other things that I can well do without, and which would pull me away from the studies necessary at the moment, even now it isn’t always easy to fight against distractions, and if I had money things would only get worse. And here in this world one remains poor and needy anyway, I’ve seen that already; one can, however, become rich in one thing and that is the goal of life, one can become rich toward God, and that is a part which shall not be taken away. And there may come a time when we can spend our money more wisely than on the best books and so on, and when one would regret having spent a lot on oneself in one’s youth, namely when we’ll perhaps have our own household and others to care and think for. There was a time when our parents, too, were uncomforted and tossed with tempest. In the midst of life we are in death, those are words that apply to each of us personally, that is a truth we see reconfirmed in what you told me about Caroline van Stockum, and earlier we also saw it in another member of that family. It affected me, and I sincerely hope with all my heart that she’ll recover. Oh, how much sadness and sorrow and suffering there is in the world, both in the open and in secret. ‘Seek, and ye shall find’16 is also one of those truths. How much has changed in that family if one compares it with how it was a few years ago. It was many years ago when we were together. And that was the time of The landlady’s daughter, and Longfellow says ‘there are thoughts that make the strong heart weak’, but it is written above all ‘Let him who has put his hand to the plough not look back’20 and ‘Shew thyself a man’. I looked for it in the illustration after the painting by Ruisdael, Haarlem and Overveen, that painter knew it too. Should she quickly recover sufficiently for her to be taken back to The Hague23 and you then see her, give her my regards, and if you can find the words to cheer her up or give her courage and remind her what important reasons she has for being and, as it were, the right to live, especially for her children’s sake, tell her and you will be doing a good deed. Faith in God is renewed in a mother; what she feels for her children is holy and comes from Above and from God, and He says in holy writ to every mother ‘Raise this child for Me and I will give thee thy reward’. A strong word spoken from the heart at the right time can give comfort and do good. 
   Was up rather early this morning and left around 6 o’clock for the early service, afterwards I walked down all sorts of old streets and would have liked to have you with me. You know the painting (at least the lithograph and woodcut made after it) by Daubigny, The Marie bridge, I thought of that. I like to walk in those old, narrow, rather sombre streets with chemists’ shops, lithographers and other printers, shops with sea-charts28 and warehouses for ships’ victuals and so on, which one finds near the Oudezijdskapel and the Teertuinen and the end of Warmoesstraat, everything is evocative there. Then went to bid good-day to Vos and Kee, and then to the Eilandskerk where the Rev. Ten Kate – the poet of De schepping and the writer of many beautiful books, such as, for example, ‘Bij brood en beker’ – gave the sermon30 on Rom. I:15-17: So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith. The church was very full, and when one looked at those faces one saw something of the faith, for it was on many a countenance, on those of men and on those of women, written in their features in various ways, something to read. His voice sometimes uttered sounds and expressions like Pa’s, and he spoke very well and from an overfull heart and, although the sermon wasn’t short, church was out almost before one knew it, because his words were so enthralling that one forgot the time. Made a summary last week, for a change, of the journeys of Paul, and drew a small map to accompany it, that is good to have. Uncle Stricker recently gave me a book on the geography of Palestine (German, by Raumer), of which he had two copies. This is a nice excerpt from Télémaque. Mentor says, The earth is never ungrateful, she always nourishes with her fruits those who cultivate her with care and with love, she denies her goods only to those who fear giving her their hard labour. The more children the ploughmen have, the richer they are if the Lord does not impoverish them, because their children, from their most tender youth, begin to help them. The youngest take the sheep to the pastures, the others who are older already lead the large flocks, the eldest plough with their father. Meanwhile, the mother of the whole family prepares a simple meal for her husband and her beloved children, who will return weary from the day’s work; she takes care of milking her cows and her ewes, and we see streams of milk flowing; she makes a big fire, around which all the innocent, peaceful family takes pleasure in singing, the whole evening long, while waiting for sweet sleep. She prepares cheeses, sweet chestnuts and fruits preserved with the same freshness as if they had just been picked. The shepherd returns with his flute, and sings to the assembled family the songs he has learned in neighbouring hamlets. The ploughman returns with his plough, and his weary oxen walk, necks bowed, with slow and tardy tread, despite the goad that pricks them. All toil’s evils end with the day. Sleep soothes black care with its spell, and holds all nature in a sweet enchantment; each one falls asleep without foreseeing the morrow’s troubles. It’s especially nice if one imagines it illustrated by the etchings of Jacque. Your postcard just arrived, fortunately, thanks for the quick reply, I sincerely hope that you had a good Sunday. Fan and Bet ’s Graeuwen and Bertha van Gogh are still here and are flowers in the house, Bertha, in particular, is a nice girl. Give my regards to your housemates, and accept in thought a handshake from Your most loving brother, Vincent Couldn’t get a money order so have to send it back to you in stamps. Amsterdam, 18 Aug. 1877. My dear Theo, I feel the need to write to you again, it might be rather a long time before we see each other again, although I hope that in any case we’ll be together in Etten for Christmas. Aunt Mina’s birthday was last Sunday1 and, as I was there that evening, Uncle Stricker asked me a thing or two and didn’t seem dissatisfied. In everything I often think of the words in Acts, ‘we came’, we too must simply go on walking, try to get ahead, looking forward step by step to the goal and keeping it in sight, and when we have made an effort for a while in that way, ‘striving on’, as Uncle Jan says, then we notice through one thing or another that we’ve come a long way. Nowadays one sees here in all the book and print shops very good portraits of Uhland, Andersen, Dickens5 and many others, also of clergymen such as Ten Kate, it’s good to look at them often, to see whether one might find it or something of it. Did I write to you that I heard the Rev. Ten Kate in the little church on Bickerseiland last Sunday week? His voice and many curious expressions reminded me of Pa. The church was full to overflowing, and the square around the little church was full of carriages. It was a good and beautiful passage he talked about, namely, Rom. I:15-17, So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you. For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is written, The just shall live by faith. It was a pleasant evening at Uncle Stricker’s on Aunt’s birthday, that morning Uncle had worked into his sermon8 the fable of La mort et le bucheron9 (the text was Proverbs XV:24, The way of life is above to the wise): A poor woodcutter, faggots piled upon his back And burdened by his load and sum of years, Groaning and bent low, made way with heavy tread And tried to reach his smoky cot. At last, by effort and by pain o’ercome He lays his burden down and dwells upon his sorry state. What pleasure has he known in all his days? Is there a poorer man in all this turning world? Hungry sometimes, and never knowing rest; His wife, his children, soldiery, taxation’s cut, Creditors and forced servitude Make of him misfortune’s very mould. He calls on Death. Death promptly comes, Asks what’s to be done. He says, to help me load this wood upon my back again You will not tarry long. Our passing comes, the cure for every ill, But let’s not shift from where we stand. Suffer sooner than die, That’s man’s maxim. I had quite a time on Thursday morning; Uncle had left town to go to Utrecht, and at 7 o’clock I had to be at the Strickers’, because Jan was leaving for Paris and I’d promised to accompany him to the station of the Hollandsche Spoor. So had got up early and seen the workers arriving at the dockyard with the sun shining wonderfully. ‘It is a good thing to praise the Lord God in the morning’, that’s what one thinks at such times. You would like the curious sight of that stream of black figures, large and small, first in the narrow street into which the sun shines only briefly and later at the yard. Had breakfast afterwards, a piece of dry bread and a glass of beer – that is a remedy Dickens recommends to those on the verge of committing suicide as being very efficacious in ridding them of that intention, for a while at least. And even if one isn’t exactly in such a mood, it’s nevertheless good to do it now and then, and to think at the same time of, for example, Rembrandt’s painting of the supper at Emmaus.
   Before going to the Strickers’ I walked through the Jewish quarter14 and on Buitenkant, Oude Teertuinen, Zeedijk, Warmoesstraat and past the Oudezijdskapel and the Oude and Zuiderkerk, through all kinds of old streets with smithies and cooperages and so on, and through narrow alleys such as Niezel, and canals with old narrow bridges such as the one we stood on that evening in Dordrecht. It was nice to see activity beginning at that early hour. Wrote a text in which all the parables are listed in order and the miracles and so on, and am also doing the same in English and French, expecting Latin and Greek to be added later on, may it come to pass! During the day I’m busy studying for Mendes, and so work on it late in the evening or, for example, today until late at night and in the morning. Having been in England and France for so long, it wouldn’t be right if I didn’t gradually master the languages more thoroughly and at least keep them up, it is written: polish it ceaselessly and polish it again, and also, Work, take pains, dig, delve, turn up the earth, leave not a spot where the hand pass not and pass again, and it is also written ‘so that it be fully leavened’. The farmer and his children22 Work, take pains, That’s the resource that fails the least. A wealthy farmer, feeling death was nigh, Summoned his children, spoke to them privily. Take care, he told them, and do not sell The inheritance our forebears handed down. A treasure is concealed therein. I know not the place, but some courage will suffice To bring you to it, and you’ll find it out. Plough your field as soon as the harvest is in. Dig, delve, turn up the earth, leave not a spot Where the hand pass not and pass again. Their father dead, the sons ploughed well the field, This way and that, in such a way that one year thence It brought back more In coin that was in no way hid. But the man was wise, In showing them, before his death, That work is wealth. The oak and the reed23 The oak one day said unto the reed, You have good cause ’gainst nature to complain: To you a goldcrest is a heavy weight, The slightest wind that may perchance Make ripples on the water’s face Forces you to bow your head. Whereas my brow, just as the mighty Caucasus, Not only stops the sun’s hot rays But bids the storm do what it may. To you, each wind’s a northern blast, to me a gentle breeze. Had you but grown within the shelter of the leaves With which I cover all this place about Your suffering would be less; I would defend you ’gainst the tempest’s rage. But you most frequently are found On the damp edges of the windy realms, And nature seems to treat you ill indeed. Your pity, answered him the pliant shrub, Springs from your kindly heart, but have no care for me. To me, winds are less fearsome than they are to you, I bend, I do not break; till now Against their dreadful buffetings You have held out; your back’s not bent, But let’s see how it ends; and as he spoke, From the far horizon furiously there came The fearfullest of all the brood The north had yet unleashed upon his flanks. The oak stood firm, the reed bent low. The wind blew harder and then harder still Until it pulled up by the very roots The one whose head reached heavenward, Whose feet stood near the kingdom of the dead. He stoops to conquer. How are you doing, old chap? Write a few words again when you can, you didn’t mind my sending the money back to you, did you, and you do know that I’d like SO VERY MUCH to come, first of all to shake your hand again, and also for the exhibition? But for the time being I’m not leaving town on Sundays, I simply may not. Had another talk this morning with Mendes about M. Maris, and showed him that lithograph of those 3 children, and also A baptism, and he understood it very well. Mendes sometimes reminds me of The imitation of Jesus Christ by Ruipérez. Do you know anything more about Caroline? Went to Utrecht and back on the day of Hendrik’s reception, I also congratulated them for you. It was very elegant, a lot of beautiful greenery in the room, the bride looked sweet enough. Uncle Jan seemed happy. In Utrecht I saw the cathedral, another old church31 and the Academy building, it’s very like the Cloisters by Westminster Abbey. Goodbye, Theo, I wish you the very best, give my regards to your housemates, I wish you well, if that is possible. Uncle Jan and Anna Tak33 send their regards, adieu, a handshake in thought from Your most loving brother, Vincent Tomorrow at 10 o’clock the Rev. Laurillard will preach a sermon in the Oudezijdskapel. It was such a good sermon, old boy, that Uncle Stricker gave on The way of life is above to the wise, That he may depart from hell beneath, and he worked that La mort et le bucheron into it with such feeling. Something else, Paul Stricker’s engagement to Miss Margreet Meyboom has been broken off, I think it’s a pity. Amsterdam, 27 Aug. 1877. My dear Theo, It’s nearing Ma’s birthday, so I’m sending you herewith a money order for 1.  1/2  guilders, because I’d very much like to give something together with you. It isn’t much, but it’s all I have; if you add the same amount to it then we can nonetheless get a good photograph. You may certainly choose one yourself. Christ walking on the sea by Jalabert is more expensive still, otherwise I’d have suggested it, and even much more expensive is Supper at Emmaus by Rembrandt. Enfin, you know it too and will surely make a good choice, but write the title of what you’ve chosen, on a postcard if necessary. Thanks for your letter, which I was very4 happy to get, as also with a cheerful letter from home that arrived yesterday. Yesterday morning was rainy, so I put on my overcoat to go to the early sermon in the Noorderkerk. The Rev. Posthumus Meijjes (that is, the young minister) was preaching there on Acts 4:12 and 12a, This is the stone which was set at nought of the builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. The Rev. Meijjes preaches very well, it’s also a treat to see his sons6 sitting with him in church. He has a very beautiful voice, though it’s almost too powerful, it sounds good, however, in a very large church, and his appearance is very striking, already wrote to you about how it moved me to see him come down from the pulpit once. It seems to me that he must be able to speak well on the ‘sycamore trees’7 and the Mount of Olives8 and, for example, on a text like ‘bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance and reform’, or ‘godly sorrow worketh a choice of salvation not to be repented of’, or on Zacchaeus. You surely understand what I mean, one can tell where his heart and thoughts always are and of what mind he is; when one looks at him one immediately thinks of a priest and a saint. His son came here yesterday and spent a while in the little study, he came in fact to ask if I would visit them at home this evening, which I gladly agreed to. Went again last week to see the old minister, his father. Also went yesterday morning to the Eilandskerk to hear Uncle Stricker, who spoke on Luke XI:28. But He said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it, mentioning the example of Mary the mother of Jesus who kept all these things, pondering them in her heart, and on Mary of Bethany who sat at Jesus’ feet and had chosen that good part, which would not be taken away from her. I spent the afternoon and part of the evening at Uncle Stricker’s and so had a good Sunday, often thinking of what you were doing. Pa wrote that Anna had written a good letter home, she was busy because there were so many people staying, but seemed to be very happy, and Ma is already busy putting together her trousseau. Will you be making the trip18 in the autumn and come to Amsterdam then as well? I sincerely hope so, write as soon as you hear anything about it. And we must arrange for you to come and stay here, there is room enough in the house and you only have to let Uncle know, we must make the most of the time and opportunity to be together. Still have a lot of work to do today, are you busy in the gallery?
   Last week at the dockyard a ship (monitor the Draak) was launched;19 that was interesting to see and a great joy for the workers. There are also a lot of shipyards on Bickerseiland, but for smaller craft; whenever I go there I take a good look at them, if one wants to learn how to work oneself one must pay attention to the workers, and to the workshops if one has a little study, for just as in a shipyard there are smaller and larger ships that are eventually finished and launched, in a study there are larger and smaller works planned and carried on ‘by patient continuance in well doing’20 and completed with God’s blessing. And it is also written ‘Forsake not the works of thine own hands, be patient, behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain. Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts’. There is something good in all labour. This is also a beautiful text: My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, ‘wanting nothing’. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and tossed. Let us therefore fix our hearts, our desires and our minds on one good thing or another, for life, and ask that of the Lord. For my part I desire so much to have the wisdom we see in our Father and Mother, in them to a greater extent than anywhere else, there is no family like ours, even, it seems to me, among good and noble people, among ‘the men of good will’, like many painters and writers, none better than our Father. Let us but continue to seek and see whether we may also find something of it, ‘do well what you do’28 and all work is the work of God, practice makes perfect, and ‘polish it and repolish it unceasingly’, work, take pains, dig, burrow, turn over, let there be no place your hand has not touched and retouched, keeping these words in mind and acting on them will make some of it turn out right. Old boy, I long for you so, do come soon with the nouveautés, and make sure to arrange it so that we can spend some time together. Will we perhaps be able to have another Sunday here together? I’d be so happy if you could see the Oudezijdskapel sometime and hear one of the ministers like the Rev. Laurillard or Uncle Stricker. Do try to arrange it. I don’t know that book by Daudet you wrote about, but have you ever read ‘A life for a life’ by the woman who wrote John Halifax? If you can get it sometime, do read it, it’s full of faith and also of nature, of the heath and of cities like Liverpool, and each page is spirit and life. Now I must work on the Greek themes, give my regards to your housemates, and also to Mauve and Jet35 if you go there. Have finished the text with the parables and miracles in French, and must finish it in English this evening. Adieu, dear brother, a hearty handshake in thought, I’d gladly send you more for Ma’s birthday but can’t, I wish you the very best, it seems very good to me that you spent those days at Mr Tersteeg’s. Believe me ever Your most loving brother Vincent Uncle Jan is planning to go to Helvoirt for a week on 1 Sept., I hope to profit by it by sitting downstairs for a long time in the evening in the living room and writing, I could do it anyway, but Uncle’s bedroom is nearby, so I have to be quiet. Can go and sit in my bedroom, but there the temptation to rest is too great when it’s late, and there’s no gas in my little study. You know that old Father Lips died. At the funeral Pa spoke about The burial in the cornfield by Van der Maaten38 and also about I Thess. IV:13-18, V:1-10, that is surely it, as is Mark IV:26-29 and John XII:24 and I Cor. XV:35-38, 40-58. Just had a good letter from Anna. Her letters are quite rare, so I’m sending you this one to read. Amsterdam, 4 Sept. 1877. My dear Theo, Herewith a note for Anna and for Lies, do write something on it and send it when Ma’s birthday is approaching. (I must tell you that the reason I’m sending it to you is that I’m afraid I won’t have any more stamps by then, except to write home. If you don’t write until later, just let this wait.) Uncle Jan went to Helvoirt last Saturday, he intends to stay away until 10 September, so it’s quiet in the house2 these days and yet the days fly by, as I have lessons daily and have to study for them, and would even so much like the days to be a little longer in order to get more done, because it’s not always easy work, and even if one has been at it for some time, it gives but little satisfaction, enfin, what is difficult is good, I feel convinced of that even if one sees no results. Am also busy copying out the whole of L’imitation de Jésus Christ3 from a French edition I’ve borrowed from Uncle Cor, that book is sublime, and he who wrote it must have been a man after God’s heart; had such an irresistible yearning for that book a few days ago, perhaps because I look at that lithograph after Ruipérez4 so often, and asked Uncle Cor if I could borrow it. Now I sit here in the evenings writing it out, it’s a lot of work but a good part of it is done, and I know no better way of getting some of it into my head. I also bought Bossuet, Oraisons funèbres5 again (I got it for 40 cents), I feel compelled to seize hold of the task forcefully, I occasionally think of those words ‘the days are evil’, and one must arm oneself and try as much as possible to have something good in oneself in order to be able to withstand and be prepared. It is, as you well know, no small undertaking, and we don’t know the outcome, and so in any case I want to try and fight a good fight. It’s a curious book, that one by Thomas a Kempis, there are words so deep and serious that one cannot read them without emotion and almost fear, at least if one reads them with a sincere desire for light and truth, that language is indeed the eloquence that wins hearts because it comes from the heart. You have it, surely. Pa wrote to me about an unfortunate incident that occurred at Uncle Vincent’s. You no doubt know about it already, namely that the wife of the Rev. Richard fell down the stairs one evening and is in a very distressing condition. And so one hears daily now one thing then another, everywhere and on all sides, which is why I have at least the impression that ‘the days are evil’. Because even if it doesn’t happen to us, one feels nonetheless that perhaps it isn’t far from us either, and that we are in the same ordeal, as it were. The fashion of this world passeth away – yet would I have thee without carefulness.
   ‘Yet would I have thee without carefulness’, doesn’t that say, as far as you’re concerned, feel all these things, ‘feel thy sorrows’, and keep them16 in thine heart with the others, but go your way, ‘return on thy way’, remain the same as you were in the beginning, when you sought good and thought to have found something of it – for God, too, is the same as He was in the beginning, and with Him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning19 – thou, too, have a right spirit within you20 and have faith in God, for those who trust in Him will not be ashamed. We see that in our father, who feels all the suffering, all the misery and also all the sin around him, who also shares in it and helps as much as he possibly can, and yet goes his own steady way, doing good and not looking back. Yes, it is certainly true, he has the spirit Jesus had, that spirit of which He said: Father, into Thy hands I commend My spirit. And so many have the same – although not in such great measure – that it isn’t a hopeless task for us to strive for it also. ‘Be zealous in amending your whole life’ is written in Thomas a Kempis, and that is what one must do and not give up, not even if one is frightened by the wrong that is in us and that rightly causes us to say, I alone have caused all this misery to myself and others25 – he who feels that, for him it is time, that is ‘the very man’. For such people it is written ‘Ye must be born again’. For such people the word of the Lord shall be a lamp28 and He himself through those words a Friend and Comforter, and godly sorrow shall worketh30 that which it shall worketh if one does not fear it. There is something that I feel compelled to tell you, you from whom I have no secrets. In the life of Uncle Jan, of Uncle Cor, of Uncle Vincent, there is much, much good and purity, and yet something is missing. Wouldn’t you think that when the two first-mentioned are sitting here, as often happens, talking in the evening in that beautiful, sober room familiar to you, that it’s a sight that does the heart good, especially if one looks at them with love as I do? And yet – the Supper at Emmaus by Rembrandt31 is even more beautiful, and it could have been that and now it’s almost that but not altogether. Pa has what they lack – it is good to be a Christian, almost and also altogether, for that is life eternal33 – and now I’ll go even further and say what is missing in them, missing in their homes and in their families, and then you will say or at least think of the man who beheld a mote in his brother’s eye but did not consider the beam in his own eye34 – and then I shall answer, there is possibly something of that, but these at least are true words, ‘it is good to be a Christian, almost and also altogether’. A few days ago I spent an evening in the study of the Rev. Jeremie Meijjes, not the old minister but that very man who had moved me so much in church.
   It was a pleasant evening, he asked a thing or two about London, about which I could tell quite a lot, and he told me about his work and the blessings he had apparently experienced. Hanging in the room was a very good charcoal drawing of a religious service which he was accustomed to keep with him at home on winter evenings, very good, Israëls would have liked it, the congregation was made up of workers and their wives, there are similar subjects in Doré’s book about London. Went himself to London for a fortnight. Has a large family, 6 or 7 children, his wife37 has something indescribable – something of Ma – or of the wife of the Rev. Jones, for example. In a word, it’s a Christian family there in all its strength and bloom, there is sometimes an expression of very great happiness on the tired face of that man, and when one is in that house one feels something of ‘put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground’. Also spent an evening at the Strickers’ and heard Uncle preach last Sunday39 on I Cor. III:14, If any man’s work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. It often seems as though I already feel something of blessing and of change in my life. How I’d like to show you all kinds of things here. I think of Degroux so often in the Jewish quarter40 and also in other places; there are interiors there with woodcutters, carpenters, grocers’ shops, chemist’s shops, smithies and so on and so forth that would have delighted him. For example, this morning I saw a large, dark wine cellar and warehouse standing open, a spectre momentarily appeared to me – you know what – men were running back and forth with lights in the dark vault – now that is something one can see daily, but there are moments when ordinary daily things make an extraordinary impression and seem to have a deep meaning in another setting. Degroux managed to show that so well in his paintings, and especially in his lithographs. Your letter just arrived as I write this. Thank you. Pa already wrote that he had visited you, but what really surprised me was that Gladwell is in The Hague. Give him my warm regards, and oh, how I’d like him to come here sometime, just wrote him a postcard to ask him to do his best to come to Amsterdam as well, you try and persuade him too. You know yourself how interesting it is for foreigners to see the city, also the dockyard and the area around here, and how I’d like to show him around as much as is in my power. And I’m longing to see his brown eyes, which could sparkle so when we saw the paintings of Michel and others or talked of ‘many things’. Yes, it wouldn’t be bad if he were to come, and even stayed as long as possible, and I believe that we’d certainly feel that there was something genuinely sincere in our earlier friendship and that it was no small thing, with the passing of time one does not always feel it strongly, but it is not dead but it sleepeth, and to make it awake and alive again it is good to see each other again.
   Herewith a word for him, it seems to me that he mustn’t leave Holland without having seen the Trippenhuis and Van der Hoop, do your best to make him do it, at least if it can happen in this way and he doesn’t do it against his will. Have to stay up this evening as long as I can keep my eyes open and so end this; if I have time, I’ll finish this page. If your acquaintance with Gladwell is strong and leaves something good behind, I would think it wonderful, it has been a long time since I last saw him. Adieu, accept a handshake in thought and hearty congratulations on Ma’s birthday, but perhaps I’ll write again on the day itself. Now I’ve simply talked on and on in this letter and I don’t know if it’s good and am simply sending it the way it is. I wish you well, shake Gladwell’s hand for me, and believe me ever Your most loving brother, Vincent Longfellow wrote a book about life in Jesus, in which there is this and other things. Come unto Me, All ye that labour and are heavy laden And I will give you rest – Come unto Me For I am meek, and I am lowly in heart And ye shall all find rest unto your souls. Seest thou this woman? When thine house I entered, Thou gavest Me no water for My feet, But she hath washed them with her tears, and wiped them, With her own hair! Thou gavest Me no kiss, This woman hath not ceased since I came in To kiss My feet! My head with oil didst thou Anoint not, but this woman hath anointed My feet with ointment. Hence I say to thee Her sins which have been many are forgiven For she hath loved much. Believe Me woman The hour is coming, when ye neither shall Upon this mountain, nor at Jerusalem Worship the Father, for the hour is coming And is now come, when the true worshippers Shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth. The Father seeketh such to worship Him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him, Must worship Him in Spirit and in truth. The publican, Standing afar off would not lift so much, Even as his eyes to Heaven, but smote his breast. Saying: God be merciful to me, a sinner. I tell you that this man went to his house More justified than the other. Everyone That doth exalt himself shall be abased. And he that humbleth himself shall be exalted. Suffer little children To come unto Me, and forbid them not Of Such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and their Angels Look always on My Fathers face. What, could ye not watch with Me one hour? o Watch and pray that ye may enter not Into temptation, For the Spirit indeed Is willing, but the flesh is weak. Father all things are possible to Thee! If this cup may not pass away from me Except I drink of it. Thy will be done. Amsterdam, 7 Sept. 1877 My dear Theo, It felt wonderful to hear Gladwell’s voice in the hall as I sat upstairs studying and to see him a moment later and to shake his hand. Yesterday we took a nice walk through the main streets and past most of the churches, and got up this morning before 5 to see the people coming to the dockyard and afterwards walked to Zeeburg and also saw a cemetery and went to the Trippenhuis (twice) and he alone to Van der Hoop, and he was also at Uncle Cor’s gallery1 (who isn’t in town, however) and with Mendes in the room. Now we also have plans to go to Uncle Stricker’s (because I’ve been invited to eat there today and will simply risk it and take him along), and if we have time also to see Vos and Kee. And I would also like very much to go with him to Bickerseiland, but perhaps there won’t be time. Have also strongly suggested that he go to Haarlem to see the paintings by Frans Hals, and now he’s going there and not to Antwerp as he had planned, but will save Belgium for later and is concentrating now exclusively on Holland. We also spent a lot of time in the little study and talked of things new and old. When he’s sitting beside me I again feel the same feeling that drew me to him so often, as though he were a son of the same family and a brother in faith because he loves ‘the man of sorrows and acquainted with grief’. Who is our God and in Whose teachings and resurrection we believe, Whose spirit we seek, of Whose love we ask that it constrain us in life and that nothing separate us from it, nor things present, nor things to come. In him, too, godly sorrow shall work that which in many it has worked and works and shall work, a choice not to be repented of, for that good part which shall not be taken away, and choosing the only thing necessary and worthy of bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. He is a Christian and will become one more and more. This morning we read together the story of Elijah by the brook Cherith and at the widow’s9 – because when we lived together in Montmartre10 we found that the barrel of meal did not waste and the cruse of water did not fail11 – and yesterday evening the parable of the sower12 and others. Now he’ll stay with you for a while as well, and is longing to see your little room and what you have in the way of prints. Received from him Bunyan, The pilgrim’s progress, that is an asset, as is Bossuet, Oraison funèbres, which I recently bought very cheaply, and The imitation by T. a Kempis in Latin, which I got from Vos15 and which I hope to be able to read in Latin some day.
   He read here various bits of Bungener, Esquiros, Lamennais, Souvestre, Lamartine (Cromwell), and took pleasure in the lithographs after Bosboom, we bought one from a Jew, and he gave me instructions to buy some more for him when the opportunity presents itself. I sincerely hope that you’ll have a pleasant evening with him, and I believe that the more you seek in him the more you will find in him. We talked about this and that, and what we said to each other is this: many, having come to a point in life where one must make a choice about life, have chosen for their part ‘the love of Christ and poverty’, or rather ‘give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with bread convenient for me’. The time together flew past for me, and I wished we could have stayed together a little longer; but it cannot be, and everyone must return to his way20 and continue to do whatsoever the hand findeth to do21 in the calling wherein he was called, and I for my part am thankful from the bottom of my heart that I was able to see him again, and found in him that which drew me to him. He told me that you will certainly make the trip with the nouveautés, probably in about 4 weeks’ time, so I also hope to see you again then. I sincerely hope that he’ll have pleasant and good memories of his visit to Holland, it’s courageous of him to have persisted with that plan. Give my regards to your housemates, have a good evening with him; should wish for you to be attached to him as I feel attached to him at the moment, and accept in thought a handshake from Your most loving brother Vincent You’ve no doubt heard about the death of Mrs Richard; it must have been a difficult night. To learn the Bible well and thoroughly and with love, would that not be a very desirable thing? Amsterdam, 18 Sept. 1877. My dear Theo, The time is approaching when you’ll go travelling for the Messrs G&Cie, and I’m already looking forward to seeing and talking to you again. What I wanted to ask you is this. Wouldn’t you be able to arrange it so that we could be together for a while, quietly and calmly, I was thinking of at least one whole day. Mendes was out of town this week, staying for a few days with a Rev. Schröder1 in Zwolle who had lessons from him at one time. Being less occupied because of this, I could carry out my plan to see the etchings by Rembrandt in the Trippenhuis, went there this morning and am glad I did it. When I was there I thought, won’t Theo and I be able to see them together sometime? Think about whether you couldn’t go off on your own for a day or even longer for such things. How much someone like Pa – who oft-times travels at night, carrying a lantern, to a sick or dying person, for example, to speak to him about Him whose word is also a light4 in the night of suffering and mortal fear – would have a feeling for Rembrandt’s etchings. Such as the flight into Egypt5 at night or the entombment of Jesus. That collection in the Trippenhuis is splendid, and I saw much that I’d never encountered before, there they also told me about drawings by R. in the Fodor. If you think it’s a good idea, speak to Mr Tersteeg about it, and write a few words in advance and tell me when you’re coming, then I’ll study ahead to be free and at your disposal when you come. I can’t see anything of that kind, paintings either, for example, without thinking of you and of Pa and everyone at home. Am otherwise up to my ears in work, because it’s becoming clear to me what I actually have to know, what they know and what inspires those whom I should like to follow. ‘Search the scriptures’8 is not written for nothing, but those words are a good guide, and I’d really like to become such a scribe who is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things old and new. I spent Monday evening with Vos and Kee, they’re fond of each other and one certainly notices that where Love lives the Lord commands His blessing. It’s nice at their house, only a great pity that he couldn’t go on being a minister. When one sees them sitting there together in the evening by the kindly light12 of their lamp in the little living room and close by the bedroom of their little boy, who wakes from time to time and asks his mother for this or that, it’s an idyll, but they also know dreadful days and sleepless nights, and fear and anxiety. Walked back over the big sand works by the Oosterspoor15 which you know, and along Buitenkant, the moon was shining and everything was full of M. Maris or Andersen. From there it’s such a wonderful sight across the city and towers, with lights here and there, on one side the IJ and on the other Bickerseiland. And everything was so deathly still, ‘the withered leaf does not rustle, the stars alone speak. When all sounds cease, God’s voice is heard under the stars’.
   Was in the Oudezijdskapel19 last Sunday, where the Rev. Jer. Meijjes preached on Eccl. XI:7-XII:7. ‘Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun: but if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be many. All that cometh is vanity. Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgement. Therefore remove heaviness from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, nor the stars be darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened, and the door shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of musick shall be brought low; also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets: or ever the silver bowl be loosed, or the wheel broken at the cistern. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall turn unto God Who gave it.’20 For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap and he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap Life Everlasting. I then heard the Rev. Laurillard again in the early sermon22 on Jer. VIII:7, Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming. He told about how he had walked on a road where the leaves were already falling from the trees, and had seen a flock of migratory birds and spoke about the phenomenon of 
   birds migrating, and how man will also migrate once to a warmer land. He treated this subject in the spirit of Michelet or Rückert, or as many have also painted it, including Protais, Souvenirs of the homeland. Pa wrote that you’d been to Antwerp, am eager to hear what you saw there, long ago I also saw the old paintings in the museum24 – and even seem to recall a beautiful portrait by Rembrandt, it would be wonderful if one could remember everything clearly, but it’s just like the sight of a long road, in the distance things seem smaller and as though in a mist. There was a fire here one evening on the water, namely a barge with arrack or something similar. Was with Uncle on the Wassenaar, there was no real danger as they’d managed to get the burning barge out from between the other boats and had tied it to a post. When the flames got up a bit one saw Buitenkant and the black row of people standing there watching, and the little boats going back and forth around the blaze also appeared black in the water in which the flames were reflected, I don’t know if you’re familiar with photographs after Jazet that were in the Galerie photographique at one time but have now been destroyed, ‘Christmas Eve’, ‘The conflagration’ and others, it was something like that. Twilight is already falling, ‘blessed twilight’ Dickens called it, and indeed he was right. Blessed twilight especially when two or three are gathered together in harmony of mind, and like the scribes bring forth out of their treasure old and new things just like a householder. Blessed twilight when two or three are gathered together in His name and He himself is in the midst of them. And blessed is he who knows these things and also does them. Rembrandt knew that, for out of the rich treasure of his heart34 he brought forth, among other things, that drawing in sepia, charcoal, ink &c. (which is in the British Museum) depicting the house in Bethany. In that room twilight dominates, the figure of the Lord, noble and impressive, stands out gravely against the window through which the evening twilight falls. Just like the figure of John Halifax. He said he was a Christian, in front of a window with white curtains in a room in Rose Cottage, I think, on an evening like so many that are described with so much feeling in that book. At Jesus’ feet sits Mary, who had chosen that good part which would not be taken away from her, and Martha is in the room busy with something or other, stirring up the fire or something like that, if I remember rightly. I hope not to forget that drawing, nor what it seemed to be saying to me: I am the light of the world: he that followeth Me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
   the light of the gospel that is preached to the poor in My Father’s Kingdom, that shines, like a candle placed on a candlestick, on all that are in the house. I am come that they shall have life and that they shall have abundance. I am the Resurrection, and the Life: he that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die. If a man love Me, My Father will honour him and We will come unto him, and make our abode with him, We will come in to him, and will sup with him. The twilight says such things to those who have ears with which to hear and a heart with which to understand46 and to have faith in God – blessed twilight. And it’s also twilight in that painting by Ruipérez, The imitation of Jesus Christ, and also in another etching by Rembrandt, ‘David praying to God’, yes! we may thank ‘blessed twilight’ for the words ‘as the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after Thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God. Deep calleth unto deep: all Thy waves and Thy billows are gone over me. Yet the Lord will command His lovingkindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise Him, Who is the health of my countenance, and my God’. But it isn’t always ‘blessed twilight’, as you see from my handwriting50 I’m by the lamp upstairs, because there are people downstairs and I can’t sit with them with my books. Uncle Jan sends you his regards, Hendrik and Marie51 were here for a day this past week and have now left. Monday a telegram that the Madura had arrived at Southampton. The day of their departure Uncle left in the morning with the 6 o’clock train with Mr Vos, who had come here the previous evening from Utrecht – for Nieuwediep54 to say goodbye to them on board. I wish you well, write soon and do come soon, because it’s good to see each other again and to talk, perhaps we could go together to see the exhibition that will open one of these days. Give my regards, too, to your housemates. Old boy, how wonderful it must be to have a life behind one like Pa has, God grant that we be and that we may become more and more sons after His spirit and heart, something may yet come of that, He can raise a person above that which is his nature, His strength can be made perfect in our weakness. Adieu, accept in thought a handshake from Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 21 October 1877 My dear Theo, Want to make sure you get a few lines again soon, yesterday a good letter from Etten from which I understood that you had already been there and are expected back on Saturday evening, to spend Sunday at home as well. So you’re probably there now too, and it will be a good Sunday. Was at the early service this morning (Noorderkerk), afterwards walked around town a bit, the canals are especially beautiful now that the leaves on the trees have the colours of autumn, and then went to the English church2 and heard a very good sermon on ‘Take no thought (for your life) saying, What shall we eat? or What shall we drink? or Wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these things do the Gentiles seek: for your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and His righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you, Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof’. And he also spoke of the preceding ‘Behold the fowls of the air’4 and Consider the lilies of the field. There was a fairly large and pleasant congregation. I’m very fond of that little church, and many a person there probably recalls things and places that aren’t unfamiliar to me either. Have you ever seen or read the book by Esquiros, La vie Anglaise (or L’Angleterre et la vie Anglaise?)? I haven’t, but I think it must be an interesting book. If you have the time and the inclination, think of that piece by Jules Breton, and that other one by Michelet. Uncle Jan is going to Leiden tomorrow, from there to Middelburg, and will in all likelihood also go briefly to Princenhage, where Pa may well meet Uncle. Did you have a good trip? Write a few lines soon, it was a wonderful surprise when you came here that evening. (NB: the woman at the station had been slightly surprised at our hasty departure.) It was nice that we saw Mauve there. Coming back home, I sat up working for a long time. That was a week ago already, the days fly by.
   How beautiful that engraving after Ary Scheffer is, The holy women at the tomb of Christ, I’m so pleased to have it, especially that old woman, that’s it. Did you happen to pick up anything for your scrapbook en route? Do continue with it, for it’s a very good thing. This morning I saw the Minister of the Navy, Taalman Kip, who paid Uncle a visit and took coffee here. How much character there is in that face and in those grey eyes, His Excellency immediately reminded me of old Mr Goupil, or someone like Guizot. It’s good to remember such faces, because it’s food for the soul. I don’t know why, but I’ve been thinking the whole week of that painting and the etching after it of ‘A young citizen of the year V’ by Jules Goupil. I saw the painting in Paris, indescribably beautiful and unforgettable. All those French paintings about the days of the Revolution, such as The Girondists20 and Last victims of the terror21 and Marie Antoinette22 by Delaroche and Muller, and that Young citizen and other paintings by Goupil, and then Anker24 and so many others, what a beautiful whole they form with many books, such as those by Michelet25 and Carlyle26 and also Dickens (Tale of two cities). In all of that combined there’s something of the spirit which is that of the Resurrection and the Life, which shall live though it seems dead, for it is not dead, but it sleepeth. I’d so much like to read a lot, but I may not, though actually I needn’t yearn for it, for all things are in the words of Christ — more perfect and more glorious than in any other words. That etching by Jules Goupil hung for a very long time in my room in London in the days when I was very wrapped up in Michelet and other French writers, I believe Harry Gladwell has that etching now. Had a short letter from him since his return to Paris, would like to walk with him again on a day like today in the twilight along the Seine by Notre-Dame. Paris is so enchantingly beautiful in the autumn, and that spot not the least so. How beautiful the winter chrysanthemums in London will be in the little gardens, and they bloom there the whole winter long. 
   Are you planning to read any books in particular this winter, ‘cost what it may’? Sometimes it’s good to persevere and get on with it. Uncle Jan has also read a lot, and there are very many things31 in him. A like-mindedness and devotion and love like that between Pa and Uncle, that is good fruit32 of life, and even if that holy fire smoulders now and then because of worries and daily things, sometimes it flares up, bright and dazzling and glorious. As, for instance, that evening last winter when those two went to Hoeven together. The top of Mount Hekla is white with the snow, But inside its fire through the ages doth glow, O Thou, though with winter on thy greying head, Love, God’s own flame, in the heart is not dead. We have certainly seen what that means and we do know something about it. Such a fire of Spirit and Love is a Power of God34 against the dark and evil and terrible things of the world and the dark side of life, it is a power of the Resurrection35 stronger than death, and a light of hope that gives an awareness and an assurance in the depths and in the secret recesses of the heart, the expression of which are the words, which are simple but say much: I never despair. Now, old boy, I still have to work and must stop, I wish you well, be blessed, and may God give you and me and all of us the life that is more than meat, the life of doing God’s Word. Just look in art and in books and see whether you might find something, for it is written, Seek and ye shall find, and: If any of you is in need of wisdom, let him ask of God. And that we need. How is Caroline? Give them my regards, and to your housemates too, and to Mauve and Mr Tersteeg if the occasion arises. In thought a hearty handshake, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent The portrait of Johan van Gogh40 bears some resemblance to that Young Citizen. It, too, reminds me again of ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, those words are perceivable in many things. 
   Regards from Uncle Jan too. Amsterdam, 30 October 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, which I was glad to get. Yes, old boy, that etching after Jules Goupil1 is beautiful and forms, with all that’s associated with it, a fine and good whole that is a thing to keep in one’s heart. I rather envy your having read Carlyle, ‘French Revolution’, it’s not unknown to me but didn’t read all of it, I found parts of it in another book, namely by Taine. Am busy making an extract from Motley, including capture of Den Briel and siege of Haarlem, Alkmaar and Leiden, have drawn a map to go with it, so as to complete it. Have also finished an extract from Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s progress. Am working all the time, day in, day out, so some things do get done. I keep my work together, everything aimed at getting through the exams, I consult Mendes on everything, and model my studies on what he has done, for that is how I’d like to do it too. That history of the 80 Years’ War is really wonderful, anyone would do well to make such a good fight of his life. Truly life is a fight, and one must defend oneself and resist and make plans and calculations with a cheerful and alert mind in order to make it through and get ahead. It becomes no easier the further one gets in life, and it has been rightly said: Does the road go uphill then all the way? ‘Yes to the very end’ And will the journey take all day long? ‘From morn till night, my friend.’7 But by fighting the difficulties in which one finds oneself, an inner strength develops from within our heart, which improves in life’s fight (one matures in the storm), if we always endeavour to keep that heart out of which are the issues of life, good and simple and rich toward God, to restore that and make it thus more and more, and to bear in mind the words that we must have a good conscience before God11 and before people. As we regard others so are we regarded by many eyes. It is from the conscience — God’s finest gift, and the proof that His eye is upon us, all-seeing and all-knowing, and also the assurance that He be not far from every one of us, but as our shade upon our right hand, and that He keeps us from the evil16 — that our light comes in the darkness of life and of the world. And if we feel an eye watching us, as it were, then it is good to gaze upward sometimes as though seeing Him who is invisible.
   I know that life of Frederick the Great illustrated by Menzel, that’s a good acquisition, do go on with that collection; I also know that woodcut after Jacque, The sheepfold, do bring those things home with you at Christmas. Have bought from the Jew that lithograph after L. Steffens of which you once showed me the painting, an old and a young priest conversing in a garden, it’s a good lithograph. The scene reminds me of a painting by Jacquand, photographed in the cartes de visite, it’s called ‘The new vicar’, I believe, it has the same sentiment, and also of The novice by G. Doré. Old boy, Latin and Greek and studying are difficult, but all the same I feel very happy with it and am doing the things I have longed for. I’m no longer allowed to sit up late in the evenings, Uncle has very strictly forbidden it — yet the words written below the etching by Rembrandt stick in my mind, In medio noctis vim suam lux exerit25 (In the middle of the night the light diffuses its strength) and I make sure that a small gaslight goes on burning the whole night, and lie looking at it often in medio noctis, thinking about my plan for work the following day and considering how to go about that studying as well as possible. Hope in the winter to light the fire early in the morning (and while obeying Uncle yet letting the light shine in the night and darkness26 once in a while). The winter mornings have something special about them, Frère painted that in that workman, ‘A cooper’27 (the etching is hanging in your room, I believe), among other things. Fill my soul with a holy bitterness that shall be agreeable to Thee, and I shall humbly spend all the years of my life in Thy service, in the bitterness of my soul, yea, even in Thy Service, O Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. That is certainly a good prayer, and I thought of it when I told you in simplicity30 that it was good to steep oneself in coffee in everyday life. A person has needs, and requires strength and fortification to be able to work. And one must make do with what one has and fight with such weapons as are within one’s reach, and use the means at one’s disposal to make the most of it and gain from it. (You can see from my handwriting that it had grown dark, but now the lamp is on.)32 Ate hotchpot at Uncle Stricker’s one afternoon, and it occurred to me on that occasion to make that extract from Motley, I’ll show it to you at Christmas. Because here in town I’ve seen and walked over so awfully many doorsteps and church floors and flights of steps up to houses, it occurred to me to make those maps of rocky Scotland, and while colouring them in (green and red) I thought of those pickles33 that Uncle is so fond of and I’ve grown fond of too. A person’s soul is a singularly strange thing, and it is good, I think, to have one like a map of England made with love and to have in it as much as possible of that love which is holy and beareth all things 
   and believeth all things and hopeth all things and endureth all things and never faileth. That Love is the Light of the world, the true life that is the light of men. The knowledge of languages is certainly a good thing to have, and I follow after37 in the hope that I might also grasp something of it. When one eats a crust of black rye bread it’s certainly good to think of the words ‘Tunc justi fulgebunt ut sol in regnum Patris sui’38 (Then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father), or also when one very often has muddy boots or wet, dirty clothes. May we all at sometime enter into that kingdom which is not of this world, where they do not marry and are not given in marriage, where the sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be an Everlasting Light, and God our glory, where the sun shall no more go down, neither shall the moon withdraw itself, for the Lord shall be thine Everlasting Light, and the days of mourning shall be ended41 and God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes. And so we can be leavened with the leaven43 of ‘sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing’, being what we are through God’s grace, having in the secret recesses of the heart the words ‘I never despair’45 because we have faith in God. And then ‘Set your face as a flint’46 are really good words in many circumstances, and also ‘be like an iron pillar47 or like an old oak tree’. It’s also good to love thorns, such as the thorn-hedges around the little English church or the roses in the cemetery, they’re so beautiful these days, yes, if one could make oneself a crown of the thorns of life, not for the people but with which one is seen by God, then one would do well. I imagine you know the woodcuts by Swain, he’s a clever man, his studio is in such a nice part of London, not far from that part of the Strand where the offices of the illustrated magazines are (Ill. Lond. News, The Graphic, Seeley &c.), not far from Booksellers’ Row either, full of all kinds of bookstalls and shops where one sees all kinds of things, from the etchings of Rembrandt to the Household edition of Dickens53 and Chandos classics, everything there has a green cast (especially in foggy weather in the autumn, or during the dark days before Christmas), and it’s a place that immediately reminds one of Ephesus, as it is described with such singular simplicity in Acts. (Similarly, the bookshops in Paris are also so interesting, in the Faubourg St Germain, for instance.)56 Old boy, how inexpressibly happy I’ll be if I manage to pass my exams, if I conquer the difficulties it will be done in singleness of heart, but also with prayer to God, for I so often pray fervently to Him for the wisdom I’m in need of, and that He may one day grant that I write and deliver many sermons, the more like our Father’s the better, and to complete a Work in my life to which end all things work together for good. I was at Uncle Cor’s on Monday evening, and also saw Aunt and the whole family, all send you their warm regards. Stayed rather a long time because I hadn’t seen Aunt for a long time and one offends so easily without meaning to by giving the impression of not appreciating and of neglecting people. Looked through that book at Uncle’s, the engraved oeuvre of C. Daubigny. Went from there to Uncle Stricker’s, Uncle was out but a son of the Rev. Meyboom was visiting (brother of Margreet), an officer in the Navy, and his girlfriend and a young man, Middelbeek, who has been in London for a while and is going back there.
   At 10 o’clock Uncle came home soaking wet, for it was raining quite a lot that evening, and I had a long talk with him and Aunt, because Mendes had paid them a visit a couple of days ago (one shouldn’t utter the word genius lightly, even if one believes that there is more of it in the world than many people think, but Mendes certainly is a very remarkable person, and I’m happy and grateful for my contact with him) and hadn’t given them a bad report, fortunately, but Uncle asked me if it wasn’t difficult, and I admitted that it was very difficult and that I was doing my best to bear up and to be alert in all kinds of ways. He gave me encouragement, however. But now there’s still that terrible algebra and geometry, anyway, we’ll see — after Christmas I have to have lessons in those as well, there’s nothing for it. I also cling to the church and to the bookshops, if I can think of an errand to do there I do it. Today, for instance, I was at Schalekamp’s62 and at C.L. Brinkman’s in Hartestraat63 (that shop of Schalekamp’s is an interesting sight) and bought a couple of maps from the Teachers’ Society, of which there are around 100 at a stuiver apiece, including the Netherlands in every possible historical period. (So often, in the past as well, a visit to a bookshop has cheered me up and reminded me that there are good things in the world.) Sunday morning I went to the early service65 and afterwards to the French church, where I heard an outstanding sermon from the Rev. Gagnebin:67 the house at Bethany. ‘One thing is needful and Mary hath chosen that good part’. That Rev. Gagnebin has a pleasant appearance and a worthy head, and his face has something of the Peace of God which passeth all understanding. He does have something, I think, either of that priest in The last victims of the terror71 or of that humble and faithful manservant one sees in ‘The women of the boarding-house’. That painting by Israëls you describe must be beautiful, I can picture it from your clear description. Saw a small painting of his at C.M.’s, also one by Mauve, very beautiful, shepherd with flock of sheep in the dunes. A good cheerful letter from home too, fortunately things seem to be going better in Princenhage. I’m longing not a little for Christmas, do bring one thing and another with you, as much as possible, it’s good for all of us. Don’t be in a hurry to send the tobacco; still have some, it’s a good and necessary aid to study. Wrote a long letter to Harry Gladwell that went off today, also sent your regards. If you have the time and the opportunity, think of Michelet, you know what, and J. Breton, but you know what it’s for and that there’s no hurry, and if necessary Christmas is soon enough. Now, I must get to work and the sheet of paper is nearly full, I wish you well, write if possible, I gave Uncle the receipt enclosed in your letter. Uncle sends you his regards, also Uncle and Aunt Stricker. Bid your housemates good-day from me, and should the opportunity arise also Mauve and his wife and the Tersteegs and Van Stockums (how is she?) and Haanebeeks, and Borchers if you run into him. Blessings on everything you do, I wish you strength and vigour in these autumn days, and let it be Christmas again with us together again before we know it, as it were, adieu, a handshake in thought, and believe me ever Your most loving brother Vincent. Saw 2 photos of Gabriel Max, the raising of Jairus’ daughter and a nun in a convent garden, the first one, in particular, was beautiful. Do you know an engraving after Landseer? It’s called The highlander, I believe, a highlander in a snowstorm on top of a mountain holding an eagle he’s shot. Amsterdam, 19 Nov. 1877 My dear Theo, I feel the need to write to you again, because I often think of you and long so much for Christmas, when we hope to see each other again. Well, the dark days before Christmas are already in sight, and behind them lies Christmas, just like the kindly light1 from the houses behind the rocks and the water that breaks against them on a dark evening. The Christmas celebration was always a bright spot for us, and may it remain so. An entrance exam has been held at the university here for the first time — it’s here in the city that I’ll sit the exam as well. In addition to the usual 4 subjects of Latin, Greek, algebra and geometry, they also tested history, geography and Dutch. Have taken pains to find a teacher of Algebra and Geometry and have succeeded, namely a cousin of Mendes, Teixeira de Mattos, a teacher at the Jewish School for the Poor. He gives me hope that we’ll have met the requirements by around October of next year. If I should then pass the exam, things will have gone very well indeed. Because when I started they said that 2 years would be necessary for the first 4 subjects mentioned, whereas if I should pass in October, I’ll have done more in an even shorter time. May God give me the wisdom I need and grant me my heart’s desire, namely to complete my studies as soon as possible and to be inducted into a living and the practical duties of a minister. Doing that work, and being devoted to it, I believe one would be doing what God wants one to do. The preparatory studies (i.e. those preceding the actual theological study and practice in preaching and speaking) more or less comes down to the history, languages and geography of Greece, Asia Minor (which can be taken to include Palestine) and Italy. So I have to study these just as diligently as a dog gnaws a bone, and similarly I should like to know the languages, history and geography of the northern countries, i.e. those around the North Sea and the English Channel. Have finally succeeded in making a map of Asia Minor, Greece and Italy, fairly large (which now includes Paul’s4 travels as well), and also one of England which finally has something of what I wanted it to have, at least Mendes sees it in it, namely that it was not drawn without feeling and love. (I put in the names from a map in the Atlas Antiquus of Spruner-Menke5 that Mendes has, because it’s one to be used for history.) Come on, do your best to take a look at that atlas sometime, likewise the one by Stieler in particular. Because it is artistry. (Spruner-Menke, Atlas Antiquus.)
   On Sunday I heard the Rev. Ten Kate7 on John XIV:1-6 (In my Father’s house are many mansions: Whosoever says that, what our Father’s house holds in memories for us, what it promises us). He ended with: The hour is coming in which the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of the people and shall stand up, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of the Eternal Life. Blessed are the homesick, for they shall come home. The church was so packed that I stood. Spent two evenings at Uncle Cor’s, once to look at old books (including volumes of L’Illustration in which I found many old acquaintances, that is really an interesting magazine, among other things an old portrait of Dickens10 and a woodcut by De Lemud, ‘The cup of coffee’, a young man with rather severe and sharp features and a serious expression who looks exactly as though he were thinking about that passage from The imitation, On the monastic life, or as though he were contemplating some difficult but good work or plan, as only a soul in need can. Such work isn’t always the worst, but what one does in sorrow, as it were, lives on. Happy the man who is instructed by Truth itself, not by signs and passing words, but as it is in itself, are good words). Then I was also at Uncle Cor’s on Aunt’s birthday, i.e. last Friday, they played cards that evening, and because I can’t I sat there reading A. Gruson, Histoire des croisades (Panthéon classique 50 cmes). That’s a very beautiful little book, I would almost say that here and there it was written with the sentiment of Thijs Maris (herewith, among other things, a page that struck me), such as when he paints an old castle on a rock with autumnal woods at twilight, with the black fields with a peasant ploughing with a white horse in the foreground, and it also made me think of Michelet and Carlyle. I should like so much for Pa to know that etching of A young citizen of the year V. Do you approve of giving it on Pa’s birthday or before then, along with some small photos of the Revolution, so that it forms a whole from which Pa can see what we often think about? Perhaps you already know that there have been sad tidings today from Brussels, that Pa has already gone there. Uncle Jan, who received a telegram containing this news from Ma, telegraphed Pa and received the answer ‘Condition unchanged don’t come yet I’m here’. Uncle Jan and Uncle Cor were already set to go there together, now they’re awaiting further notice from faithful Pa. Will there then finally be an end to that long and terrible suffering? Goodbye Theo, write soon, old boy, if you can, may God preserve our health and give us the clarity of mind and the strength and vigour we need every day. Uncle Jan, Uncle Cor and the Stricker family send you their regards, and accept a hearty handshake in thought from Your loving brother Vincent That news about Uncle Hein comes while I’m writing this. Paul Stricker will in all likelihood have to return to Holland because of his health. A good letter from Johan van Gogh, and Willem23 is also doing relatively well, but does have to look after himself and be careful. 
   After some days, all the miseries suffered by the Crusaders before the walls of Antioch were seen as trivial and mild compared with the woes they suffered within them. Hunger and thirst were beginning to harass them dreadfully. As long as there was any fodder left for the horses, they kept them to drink their blood; some days later, they found themselves forced to kill them, in order to feed on their flesh. Plants of whatever kind were avidly devoured. People ate the leaves of trees, and boiled animal skins. Even the dried leather from pieces of armour provided nourishment. Hunger lent this food an exquisite and delightful flavour. And it was not only the lowliest among the Crusaders who found themselves cast into this state of destitution; the same suffering made all men equal and brought all heads to the same level. Commanders, soldiers, women, maidens, all suffered together. The people bemoaned their hunger with loud cries, and none could assist another, nor escape the scourge. Even Godfrey found himself with no horses and no money. It is reported that several unhappy people dragged themselves, half dead from inanition, through the streets of the city, crying: ‘O Lord, may Thy name be blessed!’, and they consoled themselves in the hope that the sufferings of this life would have their reward in the next. But the same resignation did not hold sway throughout the army, and desertions recommenced; William the Carpenter, forgetting the oath he had made to remain true to the sacred cause, fled for a second time. Alexius Comnena, from whom help was expected, turned back on learning of the agonizing situation of the Christians of Antioch. Some hours after the return of Peter the Hermit, who had been sent to the infidels’ camp to order them to abandon the siege of Antioch and to give free passage to the Christians, and who had reported nothing but threatening words, a strange excitement was seen to seize the Christians, incensed at the haughty words of the Turkish commander. Their pale, defeated faces, their dull, lifeless eyes suddenly revived, and their bowed, wasted bodies stood up straight and proud. All was made ready for the battle that was to take place on the following day, and people prepared themselves with prayers and religious processions. It was the day of the feast of Saints Peter and Paul, and this circumstance increased still further the army’s courage. All the troops, with the exception of the Count of Toulouse and a small number of soldiers from Provence, who were left behind to hold the garrison of the Citadel, left Antioch and were drawn up in battle order on the plain that lay before the city. The advance guard was preceded by priests and monks carrying the Crucifix in their hands, calling aloud for Divine protection and crying out in the words of the Psalmist, ‘Be Thou a tower of strength to those who put their faith in Thee’. Every incident seemed to be a favourable omen, and even the morning dew, making the air fragrant with the scent of roses, was seen a mark of Heaven’s special favour. (And they won the fight.) It was on 15 July 1099 that the Crusaders took possession of the Holy City. Almost 3 years had passed since their departure from Europe. It was towards three o’clock in the afternoon, the very hour at which the Saviour expired on the Cross; an empty space opened up on the ramparts. The Turks retreated. Godfrey de Bouillon. On a fine evening in August 1096, a man of about 36 years of age was leaning in a meditative attitude on the sill of a window of the superb Castle of Bouillon, his gaze fixed on the turrets placed next to the crenellated walls, whose finials stood out in dark brown silhouette against the dull whiteness of the sky. Darkness spread slowly over the horizon, and a few stars appeared in the sky like golden eyes. In a huge courtyard below him could be heard the clatter of armour striking armour, the voices of men of arms talking amongst themselves, the neighing of restless horses and the orders issued by the squires to the soldiers. The end of the book is: It was a personification of that Spirit of God Who, ever young and strong, lives through the Centuries and beyond them. 
   Now here’s what I was thinking about while drawing that map of England that you’ll see at Christmas: If you look at a map of the world, you will see, in the left-hand upper corner of the Eastern Hemisphere, two Islands, lying in the sea. They are England and Scotland, and Ireland. England and Scotland form the greater part of these Islands. Ireland is the next in size. The little neighbouring islands, which are so small upon the Map as to be mere dots, are chiefly little bits of Scotland — broken off I dare say, in the course of a great length of time by the power of the restless water. In the old days, a long long while ago, before Our Saviour was born on earth and lay asleep in a manger, these Islands were in the same place and the stormy sea roared round them, just as it roars now. But the sea was not alive then, with great ships and brave sailors, sailing to and from all parts of the world. It was very lonely. The Islands lay solitary, in the great expanse of water. The foaming waves dashed against their cliffs, and the bleak winds blew over their forests; but the winds and waves brought no adventurers to land upon the Islands, and the savage Islanders knew nothing of the rest of the world, and the rest of the world knew nothing of them. Dickens, A child’s history of England.  In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. And the earth was without form and void and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said ‘Let there be Light’ and there was Light. And God saw the Light that it was good, and God divided the Light from the darkness. And God called the Light ‘Day’ and the darkness He called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by Him and without Him was not anything made that was made. In Him was Life and the Life was the Light of men. That was the true Light which lighteth on every man that cometh into the world. Amsterdam, 25 Nov. 1877 My dear Theo, Thanks for your excellent letter, thanks also for that passage from Michelet, which I’ve written on the back of the map of Normandy and Brittany, how really good and beautiful it is with its own peculiar beauty, the most beautiful expression of which is perhaps to be found in that story of Elijah by the brook Cherith and at the widow’s2 — it is written with singleness of heart3 and poverty of spirit, by one who was sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing. Good that you’ll be going to see those maps by Stieler and Spruner-Menke6 at the library; they too are beautiful, with the same beauty, it is good to think often of Scotland. Yesterday evening I was at Uncle Cor’s and saw them again there – thus Elijah’s soul, I imagine, was more than any other that of Christ, ‘the man of Sorrows, and acquainted with grief’, full of such things, also those of our Father and Mother. Dickens had it too, I once saw a portrait of him that I won’t forget, strange and, one would say, savage, in which he was sitting on a chair by a fire, I believe, as though watching someone. In Stieler’s atlas there’s a map of the British Isles, and one of England, Scotland (superb)11 and Ireland separately. If you look through the atlas, also pay attention to those of Denmark, Sweden and Norway, and especially that of Greece. England is a country after God’s heart, if one looks at those maps one cannot help thinking: God is wise and great, He who has made that in such a way that it be what it is. Pa wrote from Brussels and later telegraphed to both Uncles17 to come. When the letter arrived, Uncle Jan had just gone to Leidsestraat, and I went there too to bring the letter, being not a little afraid, however, that Uncle Jan would have just gone home and thus we would miss each other. I saw Uncle in Dam Square, waiting by a street-lamp for the omnibus. We then went into the Van Gend & Loos delivery service, or the Hollandsche Spoor, there in Dam Square, and read the letter. They both left the next morning, now Uncle Cor has come back. It’s so very, very sad there in Brussels, when one hears such things — so terrible, and they could actually afflict us too, for who are we and what makes us different? Then one indeed understands a little why He uttered these words ‘He who hate not, even his own life also, he cannot be My disciple’, because there is reason to hate that life and what is called ‘the body of this death’. And it has indeed been rightly said: If you desire to learn or know anything to your advantage, then take delight in being unknown and unregarded. A true understanding and humble estimate of oneself is the highest and most valuable of all lessons. To take no account of oneself, and always to think well and highly of others is the highest wisdom. Happy the man who is instructed by Truth itself, not by signs and passing words, but as it is in itself. It is fortunate that it is also part of that truth that there is a life after this life that God will give to those that love Him with all their heart. And happy is he who also lives by that bread of life25 which is the word of Eternal Life26 that proceedeth out of the mouth of God.
   Had to draw a map of ancient Italy for Mendes, or rather two, because I also made one of Central Italy, more or less from Rome to Naples, on a larger scale, containing in one corner a separate map of Latium (in which Rome lay). When I saw Uncle Jan standing in Dam Square that evening, his figure reminded me of that of Landseer’s Highlander (or is the engraving called ‘The mountain top’?). Paid a visit this week to the Rev. Jeremie Meijjes, went there when it was raining in the hope of finding him at home, yet he was out, who knows whether he hadn’t gone at that very moment to visit someone else for the same reason. But his wife was at home, sitting at work in a small room like the back room at Etten (only this one was on the street). She reminds me of Mrs Jones, and she could pass for an Englishwoman as far as her appearance is concerned, especially if she were wearing a dress of English fabric, Scottish plaid, for example. They’re such nice people, met them recently at a lecture and they stood out from the others in the audience just like an old, moss-covered apple tree or a rosebush from the cemetery or an elm tree with crows’ nests would stand out among all kinds of unnatural, exotic plants. Uncle Cor told me about a walk he took with Uncle Jan in the Bois de Cambre. You know that gnarled undergrowth and the trees there with their strange shapes, and there was a stormy sky with big clouds reflecting in the puddles on the ground. It was a profoundly melancholy journey for both of them, and for Pa too. There’s often a change in such a condition on the ninth day; Uncle Jan wanted to wait that out and will probably stay till Monday. (The news from Princenhage isn’t good either.)30 I hope to send you the little book about the crusades (Histoire des croisades, Gruson)31 at the beginning of next month. Read it sometime, and then the two of us will give it to Pa. Was reading it this evening at the station, waiting for the train on which Uncle Cor was due to arrive. And Brion has also died, it really is beautiful work that he did in his lifetime. Do you know an old painting of his, A burial on the banks of the Rhine? I also find that one in the Luxembourg, ‘Noah’, so beautiful, and what a great variety of things he has made, he had a great talent and he made the most of it and gained from it. The illustrated edition of Erckmann-Chatrian also contains many illustrations by him. The invasion37 is also one of his most beautiful paintings. Tomorrow Pa will marry Marijn van Aertsen, he’s a stalwart man, and Brion would probably have painted him well.
   If you still have an old lithograph in the gallery, a divine service, in Lapland or thereabouts, and also that one by Meyer von Bremen and pendant that are also hanging at home, mothers with children, put them aside and write and tell me what they cost. And something else, if there are still any of that Christus Consolator and pendant. That portrait of De Ruyter, an old aquatint42 hanging here in Uncle’s room, that’s also really beautiful, I look at it so often, it has a stormy or thundery expression, something like the way I imagine Cromwell. Saw at Uncle Cor’s a new engraving after Erskine Nicol, ‘Sabbath’, an old woman going home in the rain, it’s very good and engraved with skill. Tomorrow morning I’ll go to the little English church you know, it lies there so peacefully in the evening in that quiet Begijnhof between the thorn-hedges, and seems to be saying ‘In loco este dabo pacem’, that is ‘in this place will I give peace’, saith the Lord. Amen, be it so. The yard is a pleasant sight in the mornings, now that it only gets light so late in the dark days before Christmas and the workers don’t come until 7 o’clock. It’s blowing a storm outside, we have wind and rain aplenty these days. While translating ancient Roman history I read how a raven or eagle would sometimes settle on the heads of certain people46 as a sign and proof of approval and blessing from Above, it seems to me those men must have looked like Pa or like Uncle Jan or Uncle Cor. God, the only One that is True, is not of yesterday or today only, but from the beginning always the same, and likewise the man after God’s heart of whom we see such a wonderful and apt example in Ulysses of Ithaca and his son Telemachus. It’s good to know that story, and I consider it a reason for great joy and consider myself fortunate that it is given to me to hear a little about these things. Now, from Uncle Cor I’ve received A child’s history of England by Dickens, don’t know if I’ve written this to you before, that book is fine gold, among the things I read in it was the description of the battle of Hastings. I believe that if one carefully reads a few books such as Motley, such as that one by Dickens, such as Gruson, Croisades, one cannot help acquiring a good and single eye53 for history in general. Old boy, if I should pass my exam, if God grant me that, what an outcome it would be. That first exam with all those subjects that do seem so simple yet are difficult enough, when that is truly behind me then I’ll have good heart for what must follow.
   Have just come from the English church, the sermon was on Matthew IV:1, the temptation in the wilderness, and the last words of the sermon were ‘Blessed is the man who endureth temptation for when he is tried he shall obtain the Crown of life which the Lord hath promised’. It was raining and blowing terribly and the weather was so strange, and the sky, that I took a long detour through those Zwanenburg streets57 with all those drawbridges, and over Groenburgwal and around the Zuiderkerk. There weren’t a lot of people in church, but many a face with a singularly appealing expression betraying good character, I like being in that little church so much. On many a face there one could read, as it were, what one can find in those English books by Eliot and others. Must go to Stricker’s this afternoon, they’re very concerned there about Paul, there’s a telegram at the Ministry for the Colonies that he must return to Holland owing to bad health, and a replacement is being requested for him — and so far they haven’t had any news from him or from Mr Scheffer. Uncle wasn’t well this week, a kind of fever and headache from worry, I think, isn’t preaching today. Went to eat there twice this week when Uncle Jan was away. I still have to work, Latin themes for tomorrow morning, and whatever else I can manage. Write again soon if you can, and I wish you the very best in every respect. I hope to have a few more of those maps by Stieler before Christmas. I’m studying now, and even if it costs a bit more it must be good, and I want to endeavour to do it as I see others who take it seriously doing it — it is a course and fight for my life61— neither more nor less. Anyone who gets through this course of study and perseveres until the end won’t ever forget it, and to have done it is a fine possession. That Wierda62 is indeed a faithful servant and, I believe, very clever, one really finds a lot of nice people in the bookselling business, C.M., Mr Braat, Schröder64 here (Mendes gets his books from him, and I go there too sometimes), Wierda, one could also count Mr Tersteeg among them, and that young man you met on your trip, among others, and you are one of them too, hang on to what you have, for you too are in the fight. Happy is he who can look back on his life without too much self-reproach and venture to say ‘I never despair’. Give my regards to your housemates, adieu old boy, we must do our best to travel together at Christmas, accept in thought a hearty handshake from Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 4 December 1877 My dear Theo, I’ve just returned from a visit to the Rev. Jeremie Meijjes, this time I found him at home but he had to go to the Church Council, so I only spoke to him briefly, also saw his wife and the two youngest children, and his wife read me part of a letter from their son who is at the institute in Den Helder. Now that I’m undergoing the ordeal of exams myself, I sympathize with others in the same position, and from several remarks I can imagine how they are doing to some extent. Anyone aspiring to a position in society must go through a time of great difficulties and exertion, success can depend on little things. If one says or writes a wrong word in an exam it can be the cause of failure. ‘All things are full of labour, man cannot utter it’5 — those are true words, and if one thought too much about the dangers of all kinds that surround one – all those who don’t have to take exams no less than those for whom that lies in store, one would become dizzy, and then one would almost certainly not pass, and would almost not dare to do a thing. It is indeed good that a voice speaks to us from the Bible, strengthening us with words like ‘Let not your heart be troubled’, ‘have faith in God’. It is also good to look at those who have succeeded and have got through the difficulties more than at those who succumbed to them. Man makes things difficult but God gives the blessing. God can work in a person so that he can write and deliver thousands of sermons — that is something good and worthwhile — and I hope that that will be my portion8 — the Preacher spoke of vanity of vanities, all is vanity, and Paul was sorrowful yet alway rejoicing10 because of ‘the foolishness of preaching’, but in the meantime He went on preaching anyway and never stopped, and it is written again and again ‘we came’, and Jesus above all said that He worked while it was day, before night came, when no man can work, and that His Father worketh hitherto and He had too. Heard the Rev. Laurillard yesterday in the Noorderkerk15 on Acts iv:32, And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common. He has a wonderful talent, a new approach16 each time, and everything very spirited and lively, there is something special, something ‘evergreen’, something of the imperishable, ever-youthful and fiery passion that is also in Pa. I so believe that he, more than any other minister here, has put his whole heart into his Work. He who does that does wisely, I believe, and will keep going the longest, and will indeed be blessed in other respects and circumstances. Of course you know that Uncle Hein died, thank God, we may well say, because the end was relatively calm and the deliverance came at last. When something like this happens, one sometimes hears more sincere thoughts from many hearts than in cases of a less serious nature, and then one hears many saying ‘life is short’. The best that we can ask, perhaps, is to choose correctly and to speak the right words in the decisive hours of that life. Pa has had lumbago again, as you’ll already have heard, in one of his last letters Pa wrote about the marriage of Marijn van Aertsen. On that occasion Pa gave a sermon on Jesus loved Mary and her sister, and Lazarus.
   If you can, write and tell me as soon as possible when you plan to go to Etten and whether we could arrange to travel together. I’d very much like to take the opportunity of this trip to stay in Haarlem until the next train, and especially also to stop a while in Dordrecht. I’d like very much for us to go to Dordrecht again together, couldn’t that be arranged? Have just had some writings bound that I wanted to preserve as well as possible, it was a nice feeling when I received them at home, I gave them to a bindery near here in one of the narrow streets of Kattenburg, where all kinds of religious works are published, and the shop belongs to two brothers whose appearance immediately made me think of two things, namely church owls and the lion’s heads on doors. Have walked rather a lot this week, it can’t do any harm to get to know the city a little. While working today I had lying before me a sheet from Bargue’s Cours de dessin, 1st part, No. 39, Anne of Brittany. That was already hanging in my room in London with No. 53, and ‘A young citizen’24 was then hanging between them. What I found beautiful and good in the beginning I still find to be so. The expression on the face of that Anne of Brittany is noble and reminiscent of the sea and rugged coasts. I’d like to know her story. She’s truly a beautiful woman. De Lemud would surely have drawn her figure well. I’d really like very much for us to be together in Haarlem, write in any case when and for how long you could get leave. Old boy, I long so much for Christmas and home and you; when you write, remember to report what I asked you regarding those lithographs. Bring as many of your prints as you can, even if I know them, I’d still like to see them again. It’s a nice family, that of the Rev. Meijjes — but none of the ministers is really like Pa. His work is brilliant, and besides, a better man than Pa will not easily be found, for he knows how to keep himself in check and to control himself and to do what is good and dutiful, more than his own will. After church last Sunday I met that person who works in Centen’s bookshop, with whom you travelled and whom I’ve also met at Braat’s, and here too. Talked with him and gave him your regards, as you had asked me. He had also been to the Rev. Laurillard. And this morning I saw and spoke to him again at the Post Office. He sends you his regards. His appearance had already struck me often, before you told me who he was, I’d like to know more about him. So almost another year has gone by in which much has happened to me, and I look back on it with thankfulness. If I look back in general on the time spent at Braat’s and the months of study here, then those are truly two good things. Old boy, if I were at university next Christmas, and already through the first difficulties of the beginning, just as I am now through the beginning of Latin and Greek, how happy I should be. Undefessus favente Deo, ‘tirelessly with God’s grace’, that is certainly a good state to be in, and a phrase that Mendes is fond of, he mentioned it last Saturday. Wrote to Harry Gladwell today and also gave him your regards. I hope that he’ll go home for Christmas.
   Sent you today for St Nicholas30 two maps from Stieler, namely the British Isles and Normandy and Brittany. Hang them up in your room for a while, promise me you’ll do it, I’ve copied them both quite carefully, as you know, and the one of England twice in fact, on the one that turned out best I wrote the division of the country and the names in Latin, and changed the surrounding countries to what they were in Roman times, such as Lake Flevo instead of Zuiderzee. To do it I went to Mendes earlier than usual on several mornings, and there compared my map with those of Britannia, Caledonia and Ierne in Spruner-Menke’s Atlas antiquus. So I don’t need these any more, and it’s good for you to have them to look at for a while. At the Rev. Meijjes’s I also heard them talking about Stieler’s atlas. His son, who’s at the institute in Den Helder, has the complete atlas and wrote in his last letter, among other things, that he had copied the map of the world. Perhaps you know that Uncle Cor also has one lying in the room in which that large painting by Bernier34 is hanging. Recently saw at Uncle’s a large drawing by Bosboom, Sacristy, also two by Miss van Bosse that were very beautiful, especially the one of a farmstead. Then, along with the maps, you’ll be getting Gruson, Histoire des croisades. Also gave that book to Mendes, who liked it; even if you don’t have time to read it from beginning to end, at least leaf through it from beginning to end, then the most beautiful passages will catch your eye of their own accord. If the work of Thijs Maris is beautiful, then this is too. Since Uncle Jan sent a box to Etten, sent to Cor for St Nicholas a lithograph after J. Maris of a girl coming from the cemetery, which one sees in the background with the gravestones and the little church. A monk sits by one of the gravestones. If you don’t have that one, swap it with Cor for another lithograph. When there’s nothing else, there’s always something more, goes the proverb, and I experienced that this morning, when I thought that I couldn’t give anyone a St Nicholas present, because I nonetheless found something for everyone, even though it’s not much, Pa and Ma have a map that I drew. It’s already growing dark, and the view of the yard from the window beside me is indescribably beautiful, with that avenue of poplars whose slender forms and thin branches stand out so delicately against the grey evening sky, and then the old building with the arsenal in the water39 that is as still as ‘the water of the old pool’ that is spoken of in the book of Isaiah, the walls of that arsenal are completely green and weathered at the bottom at water level. Then, below, the little garden and the fence around it with rosebushes, and everywhere in the yard the little black figures of the workers, and also the little dog. Just now, too, the figure of Uncle Jan with his long grey hair, probably going to make the rounds. In the distance the masts of the ships in the dock, in front the Atjeh, completely black, and the grey and red gun-turrets, and here and there the street-lamps are just being lit. There goes the bell, and the whole stream of workers is coming towards the gate, and with them the lamplighter to light the street-lamp in the square behind the house.
   Also heard the Rev. Laurillard a while ago at the celebration of the Lord’s Supper, speaking so well on the text ‘the preaching of the cross is the power of God’, because they are words of truth that reveal the thoughts of many hearts, because they are the words of Eternal Life, the word that proceedeth from the mouth of God by which man shall live and not by bread alone, with the life that is more than meat, which is to know God, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, Whom He hath sent, and because heaven and earth shall pass away, but the preaching of the cross shall not pass away. Have you ever seen any of his books? ‘Uit de cel’49 must be very beautiful, for instance, and I was moved by this passage from Rust een weinig:50 That which pleases God the most A certain fallen angel would again be taken up to heaven in grace if he brought thither the gift that pleases God the most. Gladdened by that promise and full of hope, he then turned towards the earth. He hovered over a field, where a fierce and violent battle was being fought. It was a battle between a tyrant’s crew and a host of valiant men fighting for their freedom of hearths and altars. They fought courageously but with an unfavourable outcome. Their ranks, however, were sorely depleted, and at last only one man was left. Moved by the stubborn valour of this hero and his late fellows, the despot offered him prestige and honour. The answer was an arrow-shot. But that arrow-shot missed its mark, and the valiant friend of freedom was immediately struck down. The fallen angel descended to his body and took a drop of his blood, and thought that this would surely be the gift that would ensure his entrance to the heaven barred to him. But at the gates of heaven he was told that he would have to search again. Because there was something else, something even more exalted. A few moments later he was hovering over a wood. From that wood the sounds of moaning and groaning came to him. He approached and saw a youth lying there, whose hollow-cheeked face was the colour of lead. He was a victim of the plague. This youth had stolen away from the town, so that the maiden he loved and who loved him would not die by coming near him. But she looked for and found him. Then there arose a touching battle between Love and Love. His love for her called out, as though insane: go away! and her love for him answered with resolve: no! Thus they died both of them together. The fallen angel caught the last sigh that crossed her lips and raced upward with it, in the certain hope that this gift would open up heaven to him. But at the gates of heaven he was told that he would have to search again, that there was something else, something even more exalted. For the third time the disappointed spirit flew down to earth. He saw below him a smiling and lovely landscape, illuminated by the slanting rays of the slowly setting sun. A delightful little boy was jumping around there, lighthearted and merry, now turning towards a charming flower, then running after a colourful butterfly. Presently a horseman rode up and dismounted at a stream there, his horse sweating and panting. His face wore a fierce expression, and all his features had something shocking about them, something that spoke of anger. But at the sight of the child it took on a softer expression, and there was something deeply melancholy about it when the words escaped from his lips: Child! I was once like you! Then a bell tolled. It was a bell that called to evening prayer. The child knelt down and prayed. Then the heart of the brute was crushed, and uttering the heart-rending cry: My mother also taught me to pray like that, all of a sudden a tear spouted from his eye. The fallen angel took the tear from his rough cheek and flew off with it to heaven. And yes! that tear of remorse was the gift, which pleased God — who hath no pleasure in the death of the sinner, but that he turn from his way and live51 — much more than anything else. The exile saw heaven open up for him again. You will probably be very busy these days, but if you have a moment, write then, and above all, as soon as you decide when you’ll be going to Etten, be sure to let me know. Wouldn’t it be possible for us to go to Dordrecht again together the Friday or Saturday before Christmas? It’s good to benefit as much as possible from the journeys and trips one must make. May you be blessed in everything you do and, if possible, receive good St Nicholas letters. Give my warm regards to your housemates, also to the Tersteeg family, Haanebeeks and Van Stockums, if you happen to go there. Does Mr Tersteeg know Stieler’s maps? Adieu, Theo, if perhaps I don’t write again before we see each other, all being well, then goodbye for now. Accept a hearty handshake in thought, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Uncle Jan sends you his regards, also Uncle and Aunt Stricker. Amsterdam, 9 Dec. 1877 My dear Theo, I feel the need to write to you without waiting too long, the reason being first of all that I must thank you for three things. First of all, for your excellent four-page letter, with which you gave me the greatest pleasure, because it does one good to feel that a brother of his also walks and lives on earth, when one has a lot of things to think about and a lot to do, one sometimes gets the feeling, where am I? what am I doing? where am I going? — and one starts to grow dizzy — but then such a familiar voice, or rather familiar handwriting, makes one feel firm ground beneath one’s feet again, as it were. Then I must thank you for an issue of the Galerie Contemporaine about E. Frère. It’s very interesting and I’m happy to have something by him. And I also thank you for the 10 postage stamps, it really is too much and you shouldn’t have done so much. A hearty handshake for everything. Now I have a few things to tell you about St Nicholas;2 I received a good letter from Etten with a money order for a pair of gloves enclosed. I already had some, however, so I bought something else with the money, namely another map by Stieler, namely Scotland alone. At present I can get them singly at Seyffardt’s, but there probably won’t always be that opportunity. I’ve drawn that map and so have it double, and because I did want to give Harry Gladwell a Christmas present I hope to send it to you for him, to enclose when a crate goes to Paris. one must build one’s house upon a rock, Scotland, Normandy and Brittany are really rather rocky, just take a look at that large map of Scotland when you get it. If I compare the work of studying to the building of a house, and these months to its foundation, then rocks accordingly lie at its base. But all of this by the by, now more about the evening in question. From Uncle Cor I received Bossuet, Oraisons funèbres, in a very good and handy edition, very complete, it includes, among other things, the fine sermon about Paul on the text ‘for when I am weak, then am I strong’. It’s a noble book, you’ll see it at Christmas, I was so happy with it that until today I’ve been carrying it around in my pocket, though it’s time I stopped that because something might happen to it. From Mendes I received the works of Claudius, also a good, solid book;9 I had sent him Thomae Kempensis de imitatione Christi and written in the front, There is neither Jew nor Greek in Him, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female: but Christ is all, and in all. From Uncle Stricker a box of cigars, you know what I did with them, they’re always so friendly at the Rooses’ and I’d already been wondering if I had anything to send when that box of cigars arrived as a godsend. And in the evening I found a letter11 from Uncle Jan lying on my table. Was then briefly at Vos and Kee’s, where Uncle and Aunt Stricker were as well, but couldn’t stay because I had a lesson from 8-10 with Teixeira. Uncle Jan spent the evening at Uncle Cor’s.
   Was at Uncle Stricker’s service this morning, i.e. in the Eilandskerk, Uncle Cor was there too. The text was ‘by Thy light shall we see light’.  It’s always a nice walk to that Eilandskerk. This afternoon I took another walk around the little English church with those maps of those rocky countries, because I had a feeling that they were connected with that little church. ‘The Church of God stands on a rock’, those words were in this morning’s hymn, and that’s how Ruisdael painted it too, and Millet in the painting in the Luxembourg. It’s a good plan of yours to write those names etc. on the map of Brittany. Bring it along at Christmas, you know that I did that on the one I drew, then we can compare them. Be sure and do it, for that is good. You talk about my coming to The Hague again on my way to Etten, I should really like to, would it be possible to stay a night at the Rooses’? If so, then you do not have to write, then I’ll count on it being possible if necessary. I should like to see your room again and the tree with ivy, I hope that will be possible and that I can leave here early enough. I can’t tell you how much I long for Christmas. And may Pa be satisfied with what I’ve done. It was such wonderful weather today, and so beautiful among those thorn-hedges by the little church when night began to fall. Had a talk with Mendes this week, or rather last week, about ‘He who hate not, even his own life also, he cannot be my disciple’. He declared that expression too strong, but I maintained that it was the simple truth, and doesn’t Thomas a Kempis say it when he talks about knowing oneself and despising oneself? If we look at others who have done more and are better than we are, then soon enough we come to hate our own life because it’s not as good as that of others. Just look at a man like Thomas a Kempis, constrained by the love of Christ20 to write that little book, sincere and simple and true as few others were, either before or since. Or in another sphere, just take a look at the work of a Millet or that of a Stieler or The large oaks by Jules Dupré. They did it: ‘let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven’, and Pa is such a man too; and however much we can do, you see, the best thing is to keep our sights on such people and to seek whether we too may perhaps find something. And to believe that it’s true what Pa said, that if someone asks ‘Lord, I should so much like to be earnest’, that it will be heard and granted by God. Have a good Sunday today, how I’d like to be with you, Uncle Jan has gone to Haarlem so I’m alone this evening, but still have to do as much as I possibly can. You have really given me such pleasure with that magazine on E. Frère. I once saw him myself at Goupil’s, he has something very unpretentious about him. ‘At last, he triumphed’ it says in his biography, may it be so with us one day — that can happen and it is good to say: I never despair. A person doesn’t get it all at once, and most of those who have become something very good have gone through a long, difficult period of preparation that was the rock upon which their house was founded. Man is depraved by nature, at best a thief — but — with God’s guidance and blessing he can become something of higher worth, as there came for Paul 
   a day on which he could say with frankness and trust to Herod, I would to God, that not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were such as I am, except these bonds. Thanks for what you write about the lithographs. Something else — you also sent 2 pairs of Christus Consolator and pendant, I was very glad to get them. It could do no harm if you also had that map of Scotland, then you would have three things from that atlas, and the proverb says: all good things come in threes. So count on getting that one too, and by no means buy it yourself, had first wanted to send you this one that is now going to Gladwell, but I consider it my duty to let him hear from me now and again. I hope he’ll be able to go to Lewisham at Christmas. You know that painting by Cuyp in the museum here, an old Dutch family, when he saw that he stood looking at it for a long time and then spoke of ‘the house built on the rock’34 and of his home in Lewisham. I, too, have memories of his father’s house and will not easily forget it. Much and strong and great love35 lives there under that roof, and its fire is in him still, it is not dead, but sleepeth. Now I have to hurry, for I have to get to work. So in all likelihood I’ll be coming to The Hague next week for a day, Thursday say, possibly later, I have to see how it fits in best with my work. From The Hague I hope to go to Dordrecht, and if it turns out that you can leave Saturday evening, we’ll meet each other at the station in Dordrecht. In that case I would even spend two nights at the Rooses’, if I’m going to The Hague anyway, it can’t hurt to stay a bit longer and call on some people. A pity, in a way, that Mauve is going to move, I hope that we’ll go there again together, like that evening last spring, it was really pleasant then. Now make sure they don’t go to any trouble at the Rooses’. If I can’t stay there you’ll know it without asking them and can write to me, and I’ll take it into account; if I can, tell them only the day before. I wish you the very best and blessings in your work. You’ll be busy, but actually one should be grateful for pressure and effort and all suchlike things more than for anything else, for it is only by long training in that that one develops. I sincerely hope that you’ll be able to leave Saturday, because at home they’d surely like us to be in Etten the Sunday before Christmas. So goodbye for now, if I hear nothing more from you I’ll come on Thursday or Friday, 20 or 21 December. I finally decided to hang up that page again from Bargue’s Cours de dessin, Anne of Brittany, yes, man is depraved by nature and at best a thief, but in the battle of life he can become a being of higher worth; a being of higher worth, those words sprang to mind when I had been looking for a long time at the expression on the face of that beautiful woman Anne of Brittany, the expression which explains why she also recalls the words ‘one of Sorrows and acquainted with grief;40 sorrowful yet always rejoicing’. Adieu, give my regards to your housemates, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent Etten, 30 December 18771 My dear Theo, I wish you much happiness for the new year, may it be blessed for you in many ways. Those were good days, when you were here, though they didn’t last long. My holiday will be over soon, too, but I’ll stay at least a day longer because Pa’s so busy these days, and it would be good to discuss calmly how best to pursue further study. Pa also has to preach at Princenhage on New Year’s Eve, because the Rev. Kuylman3 fell and hurt himself, dislocating his arm, and so is unable to take his turn on New Year’s Eve, and Pa has offered to do it for him. So Pa has to preach 9 times in 10 days. If you haven’t yet sent that map &c. to Harry Gladwell, wait a while, I hear he’s no longer in Paris, wrote to his father today. I may get a reply and will then add something to the roll. You forgot to take the etching after Meissonier, I’ll send it to you one of these days with the lithograph after Jules Breton, The fields in winter, because I don’t want to accept it, it belongs in your collection. It snowed last week and Cor had fun with the sledge and so did I, because I sledged on the road with him and a girl who was staying at the Hackstrohs’. Today Pa, Ma, Cor and I took a lovely walk, you should have been there. Yesterday I saw the sewing school that Ma now holds in the consistory, it is indeed pleasant, one would like to have a painting of it, there are already quite a few children coming to it. Another painting has occurred to me that is related to Brittany, namely Ribot, The prayer, a number of children kneeling in a corner of a church at dusk, there’s a large etching by him of the same thing, which you perhaps know. Jacque once made an etching of the same subject, but smaller. Made a list today of everything I could remember about the French Revolution, so as to write it on the back of the map of France, and I hope gradually to expand on that work, recording, for instance, the most important things about the Middle Ages, or the time of the 80 Years’ War, and so on. One must hold on to what one has seen or what one knows, for it always comes in useful. If you should make such lists from time to time, send them to me when you have the opportunity, then we can compare them, it’s good to do so — as far as knowledge is concerned, it’s important to hold on to what one has and to absorb it internally as much as one can; especially when one is short of money, it’s good to fill the gaps with this and similar things.
   Give my regards to all your housemates and wish them all the best from me. It’s not impossible that, on my way to Amsterdam, I could spend another night in The Hague and bring you the prints that you left here myself, but don’t count on it. Adieu, again I wish you the best, and a hearty handshake in thought from Your most loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 9 January 1878 My dear Theo, I should so very much like to know if you’re better, and I’m just writing quickly to ask you to write soon, by postcard if necessary, whether your condition has returned to normal. Arrived here safe and sound on Monday evening2 and found Uncle Cor’s family playing cards at Uncle Jan’s. When Uncle Cor heard that Uncle Cent was thinking of leaving so soon, he went again to Princenhage to see Uncle again. He returned today and was satisfied with the journey. Had spoken to the doctor in Princenhage and he said that Uncle Cent was not in any immediate danger. Had also seen both Pa and Ma and they are well, so fortunately all that preaching hasn’t worn Pa out. Was at Uncle Stricker’s yesterday, Paul left with the ship De Liberaal, they haven’t had a letter from Paul himself for quite some time, but Mr Scheffer writes that his health is improving, may they see him again as soon as possible. Started taking lessons again on Tuesday morning, intend to do all those themes that I’ve written over again, at least inasmuch as I can find the time, what with my other work. Pa advised me to do it, because once one is well grounded in the rudiments and verbs &c., one makes rapid progress with translation. I suppose I’ll find the time when it begins to grow light a bit earlier in the morning and is a little less cold, so that I can start early. One can accomplish quite a lot in a few months if one works at something from early in the morning till late at night, and so I hope to be ready for the exam around October. Saw a great many good drawings at Uncle Cor’s, including a new one by Rochussen, a diplomatic soirée, very clever. Mauve is giving that art presentation at Arti this evening, should really like to be there, but it’s likely I already saw many of the drawings that evening we visited him. Uncle Cor also had a very nice painting by Valkenburg, the interior of a peasant’s house with four small figures.
   I’ll hang up The oven by T. Rousseau9 and the Trekweg at Rijswijk by Weissenbruch10 which I got from you. I’m sorry I didn’t leave The Hague by a later train, then we would have been together a little longer, but now I hope to see you again when you make the trip in the spring. I recently went to see Hillen again, the last time I visited him I’d given him a pair of that Christus Consolator and pendant, such as I got from you, and now they were already hanging in his room, for he had put them under glass himself, I’m glad they’re hanging there. It was already growing dark when I arrived and he also showed me his living room, it looks very pleasant indeed and it’s a good house to remember. He’s a man one can really trust, for he’s very uncomplicated and does his work well and has persevered in it for a long time, I’ll be happy when I’m also that far along. It’s terribly cold here these days, and this morning there was snow on the ground, it’s good that Uncle Cent is away (because he left today at 3 o’clock to be in Paris tonight). If you visit Mauve, remember to ask for that piece by Jules Breton, The labourer, and send it when you get it. C.M. asked me if I didn’t find the Phryné by Gérôme14 beautiful, and I said I would much rather see an ugly woman by Israëls or Millet or a little old woman by E. Frère, for what does a beautiful body such as Phryné’s really matter? Animals have that too, perhaps more so than people, but animals don’t have a soul like the one that animates the people painted by Israëls or Millet or Frère, and hasn’t life been given to us to become rich in our hearts, even if our appearance suffers from it? I feel very little sympathy for that statue after Gérôme, for I see not one sign of reason in it, and a couple of hands that bear the signs of work are more beautiful than such as are seen on that statue. And much greater still is the difference between such a beautiful girl and a man like Parker15 or T. a Kempis or those painted by Meissonier, and just as one cannot serve two masters, one cannot love two things that are so very different and feel sympathy for both. And then C.M. asked if I wouldn’t feel anything for a woman or a girl who was beautiful, but I said I would have more feeling for and would prefer to be involved with one who was ugly or old or impoverished or in some way unhappy, who had acquired understanding and a soul through experience of life and trial and error, or sorrow.
   At C.M.’s there was also a beautiful drawing by Maris, townscape with water in the foreground and a vast sky, you no doubt know it. Uncle Jan and Uncle Cor send you their warm regards, Uncle Jan is well again, you know that he wasn’t well at Christmas. So write soon, and I wish you the very best, and bid good-day to your housemates. Just received a good letter from Pa, everything is all right at home, adieu, accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Amsterdam, 10 February 1878 My dear Theo, It’s Sunday evening, and I want to write a few words again, for I also really long to get another letter from you, do write again soon, I am with you so often in thought. I sincerely hope that you’ve had a good Sunday. As you know, Pa was here1 and I’m very glad of it, we went together to Mendes, Uncle Stricker, Uncle Cor, Vos and Kee and both Meijjes families, and the most pleasant memory of Pa’s visit is that morning we spent together in my study, looking over my work and talking about all sorts of things. You can imagine that those days flew by and when, after bringing Pa to the station and watching the train or even only the smoke for as long as it was in sight, I came back to my room and Pa’s chair was standing there by the little desk on which the books and notebooks were still lying from the day before, even though I know that we’ll see each other again quite soon, I broke down and cried like a child. You’ll already have heard that Mendes made a favourable impression on Pa as well. In the evening, at Uncle Cor’s, we saw drawings and books, including Doré’s Bible2 and Bida’s Le livre de Ruth and Histoire de Joseph. Was in the English church this morning4 and met Wierda upon leaving the church, who had been there too. We went for a walk together and he asked me if I’d like to come and see his room, he lives in Weteringstraat, about 10 minutes from Leidsestraat. I told him that for a long time I had wanted to see his room and where and how he lived, so I went along and after drinking coffee I stayed till around 3 o’clock and saw his books and heard a thing or two about his life, where he had been previously and so on, first he was in Bolsward, then in Haarlem and then here. He has worked hard in his life and will probably continue to do so and not give it up easily. Afterwards, at home, translated a passage from Caesar, and this afternoon to Uncle Stricker’s, I go there rather often now that Uncle8 is out of town and now that it’s lonely again here in the house since Pa left. This evening they went to see Vos, who isn’t any better. I still have to congratulate you on Pa’s birthday, even though it’s already been and gone, it will have been a good day, with Anna there too, I’m longing for a letter from home to hear how they celebrated that day. Anna was slightly indisposed and hadn’t yet recovered completely, she wrote in a letter that Pa received here. Perhaps Pa read Ma’s letter aloud to you, which she wrote while Pa was here, it told about a visit to a sick person which sounded like something out of Adam Bede.
   It’s foggy here today, fortunately Pa had good weather so that we could walk quite a lot. I’m reminding you of that piece by Jules Breton, not that there’s any hurry, but try and remember it sometime. Because in March you’ll probably make the trip again, won’t you, and also come here again? Uncle Jan will most likely come back on Tuesday. You’ll certainly have a lot to do at the beginning of the year, like most people. Wierda, too, unburdened himself on that score this morning. For me, too, things are beginning to get more and more serious as the exam approaches. I’ll be glad when it grows light a bit earlier in the morning and we’re already beginning to get used to it. Did Pa remember to give you the photograph of the Maris? The woodcut after Van Goyen, Dordrecht, is hanging in its place. Went recently to see that painting again here in the museum, it is good through and through. The next time you come here I’d like to look through the etchings by Dürer here in the museum again, as we did with Rembrandt’s last time. It’s no doubt beautiful in Scheveningen on these grey days, do you still go there quite often? Perhaps it’s like that painting by Ruisdael in the museum in The Hague. Do you have the lithograph of it that was once in the Kunstkronijk? It’s really good. How are things going at Mauve’s? Very well, I hope. Have you been there recently? I’m currently taking lessons from Uncle Stricker once or twice a week, that is a bonus. Uncle is an expert in it, and I’m glad he could find the time to do it. Now, old boy, a hearty handshake in thought, I’ll set to work, give my regards to your housemates, and also to Mauve if you run into him, I wish you the very best, write soon, also congratulations on Anna’s birthday, even though it’s still to come, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Good-night, old boy, I sat up writing till 12 o’clock, a handshake in thought. Amsterdam, 18 Feb. 1878 My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of 17 February, which gave me not a little pleasure, as I had been longing for it so very much. And I’m going ahead and writing again so soon, old chap, because I think of you so often and also long for you, and every morning the prints on the wall of my study remind me of you, Christus Consolator and pendant, that wood engraving after Van Goyen, Dordrecht, the portrait of the Rev. Heldring, The oven by T. Rousseau5 and so on, because I got them all from you, and so the pot called the kettle black when you wrote that it was so wrong of me to give you a print for your room now and then, if I find something that goes with what you already have. So enough about that, I say in turn, but write and tell me whether you’ve added some good thing or other to your collection, do continue with it, because the way you do it and set about it, it’s most certainly a good work. Yesterday evening at C.M.’s I saw a whole year of that magazine L’Art, of which you have the issue with the woodcuts after Corot. What especially struck me were woodcuts after drawings by Millet, including The leaf-fall (shepherd guarding his flock), The flock of crows, donkeys in a marsh (misty effect), The woodcutters, Housekeeper sweeping her house, Farmyard (nocturnal effect) &c., also an etching after Corot, The dune, and after Breton, The feast of Saint John9 and others, by Chauvel, among others, and also one after Millet, The beans. Was with Uncle Jan the whole afternoon and evening of Sunday, 17 Feb. at Uncle Cor’s, where Aunt Antje12 is staying these days. It was Anna’s birthday, and it was also a good day for me. Got up quite early and went in the morning to the French church, where a minister from the vicinity of Lyon was preaching, he’d come to collect money for an evangelical mission. His sermon consisted mainly of stories from the lives of factory workers there, and although he wasn’t especially eloquent as far as ease of expression goes, and though one even noticed how difficult it was for him and a little awkward, as it were, his words were moving nonetheless, because they came from the heart, and that alone has the power to make an impression on other hearts. Afterwards, at 1 o’clock, I had to be at a Sunday school given by an English minister, Adler, in Barndesteeg, he has a small but very respectable old church there. The school, though, was held in a small room where the light had to be lit even at that hour, i.e. in the middle of the day. There were perhaps some 20 children from that poor neighbourhood. Although he’s a foreigner he nevertheless preaches in Dutch (though the English service), and also gives confirmation classes in Dutch, but very charmingly and capably. Had taken along the sketch of that map of the Holy Land that I’d made for Pa’s birthday (with red chalk on heavy brown paper) and I gave it to him, because I thought that little room a nice place for it, and I’m glad it’s hanging on the wall there. Had met him at Mr Macfarlane’s, the minister of that little English church in the Begijnhof, where I had ventured to pay a visit. Was received with kindness and hope to go there again sometime.
   I then paid a visit on Sunday afternoon to Vos, who is but poorly and was lying in bed to rest a little, so I couldn’t see him. And then on to Uncle Stricker and after that to Uncle Cor. This morning I went back to see Vos, for I really wanted to see and speak to him myself. This time I found him up, but he doesn’t look at all well and Kee looked rather tired and pale too. Spent a long time there, they have a lot of worries, he brings up blood now and then and coughs a lot. Jan15 is staying at Uncle Stricker’s for a few days. Apart from visiting the English minister, I also ventured to pay a visit to the Rev. Gagnebin. Now that I’m really getting down to work and have thrown myself into the fight, it’s important to try to do it boldly and to set to work with relative forthrightness, even though there are still many obstacles to be overcome. By working and doing, one grows into the work and the doing of it, and perhaps the best way to acquire sufficient enthusiasm is to take the enthusiasm one has in oneself and to employ it and expend it and use it. The Rev. Gagnebin took it well and said that I should come back one evening, deciding on this evening, so I have to go there directly, and hope still to write and tell you how it was. Pa also advised me to try and make the acquaintance of a person or two. I did find it pleasant to speak French and English again; it’s a strange feeling if one hasn’t done it for a long time. Old boy, Dickens knew it, didn’t he, when he prayed, Lord keep my memory green yea evergreen. Amen. Twice I got up early in the morning to work on a sketch of the map of the journeys of Paul18 that I still had, making it more complete, so that now it looks good, with the names in French even better than on the ones I made for Pa and for my study, with the idea of giving it to him, for if possible I wanted to highlight this visit, because he’s a clever man from whom I may get good advice later on, once he notices from one thing and another that I take it seriously. Also showed him the map of Brittany and Normandy20 and some French texts I have. Last week Nico Mager, who’s here in town, came to visit, and that pleased me. The contract he has with Mr Braat will expire in October or November, so he is free, but also compelled by necessity, to seek another position. He’s thinking of venturing abroad and had his eye on Geneva, where he’s been before, perhaps that isn’t such a bad plan after all. If now, meaning by October, there was a vacancy at Goupil’s, that would help him out immediately. He was planning to write to Uncle Cent again, around Uncle’s birthday on 28 March. I’ve seen that he can work well. He’s a nice chap, he asked me to send you his regards if I wrote. From him I also heard some news from Dordrecht. Lord keep my memory green. I took a walk with him as well. Also told him that I thought that a young man who knew what he knew – namely what one learns when one has worked diligently for some years in a bookshop or similar position – is almost sure to find, after a time of searching and difficulties in London or some other large English city, a position in which he could earn enough to support himself while also learning to speak good English. That once he had found something like that he could count on its being permanent, and that he would thus be secure, as it were, for a few years.
   One can profit a great deal, especially when one does more than the shop assistants there tend to do, and England certainly has an advantage over Paris in that one has a better chance of finding decent lodgings and a kind of home in middle-class surroundings, which is rather difficult in Paris. And I also told him to ‘hold fast to that which you have already’21 and to go forth and see with your own eyes, because having been in a bookshop for so long and having worked there faithfully, as he has done, is an asset. You must write again soon, and as soon as you know when you’ll be making the trip, I’ll no doubt hear it, and I sincerely hope that when you’re here we’ll be able to spend some time together and that you won’t be too busy. Was just at the Rev. Gagnebin’s, but was told he was too busy to receive me (and yet he’d stipulated this hour and this day). I heard music in the house, so apparently something or other was going on. I left what I’d made for him and asked for it to be given to him. I feel the need to do something like that now and then, for it’s most certainly in doubt whether I’ll pass, i.e. all of the requirements, 5 years at the least is a long time, if one begins younger then one succeeds much more easily. Though I can work more and am better able to keep clear from distractions, and I have no desire for those things which many another craves, even so, I notice that I have difficulty learning. And in case I don’t pass, I want nevertheless to be sure of having left a sign of life here and there. It’s an amazing amount that one has to know, and even though they try to reassure me, it constantly gives me an indescribably strong feeling of fear, and there’s nothing for it but to get back to work again, for it has been clearly shown that I must do it, no matter what the cost. Onwards, then, because standing still or going downhill are things I’d rather not think about. If one did that, one would make things even more difficult and become confused, and actually end up having to start all over from the beginning. It’s already rather late and I’m really quite tired, for I’ve also walked a lot today. What would it be like at Vos’s? At night he probably often has a bad time of it, what with coughing and bringing up blood. A good letter from home, fortunately it appears that the journey agreed with Pa. I’m longing to hear how Anna’s birthday was, in all likelihood she’ll celebrate her next one in her own house. I wish you the very best and blessings on your work and everything you do, write again soon if you can. Give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’, and accept in thought a hearty handshake. Good-night, and believe me Your most loving brother Vincent 
   Tuesday morning. Apropos. Have you sent those maps to Gladwell, i.e. to London? Haven’t heard from him lately, and should like to know how he is and what his plans are. It’s wonderful weather this morning, must go to Mendes in a little while. Amsterdam, 3 March 1878 My dear Theo, It’s time to write to you again, how I should like to have been with you today, it was such beautiful weather here, and one feels that spring is coming. In the country one would probably have been able to hear a lark, but that’s difficult in the city, unless one notices the sounds of the lark’s song in the voice of some old minister whose words come from a heart tuned like a lark’s. Heard the Rev. Laurillard this morning, preaching in the Oudezijdskapel, Uncle Stricker was in that church too, and I had coffee with him. Uncle Jan went this morning to ’t Nieuwe Diep, but has come back again. Then to a Sunday school in Barndesteeg, and then walked around the outer canals, visiting three Roman Catholic churches along the way. Went yesterday to see Vos who is but poorly, it’s such a sad sight, seeing him sitting with his feet on a stove, for he’s troubled by cold feet, staring out the window with his hollow eyes. Kee is just as pale and looks so tired, went from there to Uncle Cor’s again, he’s had the gallery newly wallpapered and a new grey carpet laid on the floor, now those beautiful cupboards containing the whole Gazette des Beaux-Arts etc. in red volumes stand out better than before. Uncle told me that Daubigny has died, I freely admit that it made me sad to hear it, just as it did to hear that Brion had died4 (his Saying grace5 is hanging in my room), because the work of such men, if one understands it, moves one more deeply than one is aware of, it must be truly good, when one dies, to be conscious of having done a thing or two in truth, knowing that as a result one will continue to live in the memory of at least a few, and having left a good example to those who follow. A work that is good6 — it can hardly last for eternity but the idea expressed in it can, and the work itself almost certainly continues to exist for a long time and, if others appear later, they can do no better than to follow in the footsteps of such predecessors and to do it the same way. Speaking of a good work, would you care to have a Flemish Imitation of Christ? I hope to send it to you shortly, a little book that one can easily put in one’s pocket if necessary. When Uncle told me about Daubigny, his etchings after Ruisdael, The bush and The ray of sunlight, came to mind, and he promised to send for them sometime, since he didn’t know them at all. Was at the Rev. Gagnebin’s last Monday evening and also saw his wife and daughter, and was also in his study, where I talked to him until about 11 o’clock. He said, among other things, that at certain times in his life he had benefited from forgetting himself altogether and throwing himself into work without a second thought; that he had done a lot then and had later found himself stronger and more advanced in what he intended to do and clear in his mind. That nevertheless, even now, nobody had any idea how much effort his sermons cost him. 
   Have worked my way through the history of the Netherlands and made an extract of 30 pages, closely written. (I was pleased to come across the Battle of Waterloo10 and the 10-day campaign11 again.) Did you know that Rochussen once painted the siege of Leiden? The painting belongs, I think, to Mr de Vos. Am now working on general history as well. I really long for you to come here again, be sure and do your best to stay as long as possible. And write again soon if you can, for you must know that you always give me so much joy by doing so. Have you read anything beautiful lately? Do make sure somehow to get hold of and read the books by Eliot, you won’t be sorry, Adam Bede, Silas Marner, Felix Holt, Romola (Savonarola’s story), Scenes of clerical life. You know we gave the 3 underlined ones to Pa on his birthday last year. When I get the time for reading, I’ll read them again. Both the Rev. Macfarlane and the Rev. Adler spoke to me about them, i.e. advised me to read them. Wrote to Harry Gladwell again this week, since he didn’t answer my last letter and I wanted so much to know what he’s doing and what he’s planning to do. I still have hopes of his becoming a minister, and if that happens he’ll do it well, of that I’m convinced, but it would be no easy thing for him to carry it off. Have you ever seen an etching by Millet himself, a man pushing a wheelbarrow of dung into a garden on a day like today in early spring? And don’t forget that he also made the etching ‘The diggers’, if you ever run into it you won’t easily forget it. Thought today of the former, this morning when Uncle Stricker was looking for texts in which the word dung occurs, one of which is ‘let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and dung it’. Recently made a list of the paintings by Brion that I could remember, next time you come you must tell me whether I’ve forgotten many. Lord keep my memory green!20 One must say that over and over again. Was last Sunday evening at cousin Vrijdag’s in Houttuinen, there are still 7 children at home, it was a pleasant little circle, most of them are still very young. Couldn’t you say a bit in advance when you’ll be coming? I’ll count on it, then, by working ahead a little so we can spend some time together. Adieu, a handshake in thought, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent Uncle Jan sends you his regards. Bid your housemates good-day from me.  Amsterdam, 3 April 1878 I’ve been thinking about what we discussed, and I couldn’t help thinking of the words ‘we are today what we were yesterday’. This isn’t to say that one must stand still and ought not try to develop oneself, on the contrary, there are compelling reasons to do and think so. But in order to remain faithful to those words one may not retreat and, once one has started to see things with a clear and trusting eye, one ought not to abandon or deviate from that. They who said ‘we are today what we were yesterday’, those were honnêtes hommes, which is apparent from the constitution they drew up, which will remain for all time and of which it has rightly been said that it was written with a ray from on high and a finger of fire. It is good to be an ‘honnête homme’ and truly to endeavour to become one both almost and altogether, and one does well if one believes that being an ‘homme intérieur et spirituel’ is part of it. If one only knew for certain that one belonged among them, one would always go one’s way, calmly and collectedly, never doubting that things would turn out well. There was once a man who went into a church one day and asked, can it be that my zeal has deceived me, that I have turned down the wrong path and have gone about things the wrong way, oh, if only I could rid myself of this uncertainty and have the firm conviction that I will eventually overcome and succeed. And then a voice answered him, And if you knew that for certain, what would you do? Act now as though you knew it for certain and thou shalt not be ashamed. Then the man went on his way, not faithless but believing, and returned to his work, no longer doubting or wavering. As far as being an homme intérieur et spirituel is concerned, couldn’t one develop that in oneself through knowledge of history in general and of certain people of all eras in particular, from biblical times to the Revolution12 and from The odyssey13 to the books of Dickens and Michelet? And couldn’t one learn something from the work of the likes of Rembrandt or from Weeds by Breton, or The four times of the day by Millet, or Saying grace by Degroux, or Brion, or The conscript by Degroux18 (or else by Conscience19), or his Apothecary, or The large oaks by Dupré, or even the mills and sand flats by Michel?
   It’s by persevering in those ideas and things that one at last becomes thoroughly leavened with a good leaven, that of sorrowful yet alway rejoicing, and which will become apparent when the time of fruitfulness is come in our lives, the fruitfulness of good works. The ray from on high doesn’t always shine on us, and is sometimes behind the clouds, and without that light a person cannot live and is worth nothing and can do nothing good, and anyone who maintains that one can live without faith in that higher light and doesn’t worry about attaining it will end up being disappointed. We’ve talked quite a lot about what we feel to be our duty and how we should arrive at something good, and we rightly came to the conclusion that first of all our goal must be to find a certain position and a profession to which we can devote ourselves entirely. And I think that we also agreed on this point, namely that one must pay special attention to the end, and that a victory achieved after lifelong work and effort is better than one achieved more quickly. He who lives uprightly and experiences true difficulty and disappointment and is nonetheless undefeated by it is worth more than someone who prospers and knows nothing but relative good fortune. For who are they, those in whom one most clearly notices something higher? — it is those to whom the words ‘workers, your life is sad, workers, you suffer in life, workers, you are blessed’ are applicable, it is those who show the signs of ‘bearing a whole life of strife and work without giving way’. It is good to try and become thus. So we go on our way ‘undefessi favente Deo’. As far as I’m concerned, I must become a good minister, who has something to say that is good and can be useful in the world, and perhaps it’s good after all that I have a relatively long time of preparation and become secure in a firm conviction before I’m called upon to speak about it to others. It is wise, before one begins that work, to gather together a wealth of things that could benefit others. Do let us go on quietly, examining all things and holding fast to that which is good, and trying always to learn more that is useful, and gaining more experience. Woe-spiritedness is quite a good thing to have, if only one writes it as two words, woe is in all people, everyone has reason enough for it, but one must also have spirit, the more the better, and it is good to be someone who never despairs.
   If we but try to live uprightly, then we shall be all right, even though we shall inevitably experience true sorrow and genuine disappointments, and also probably make real mistakes and do wrong things, but it’s certainly true that it is better to be fervent in spirit, even if one accordingly makes more mistakes, than narrow-minded and overly cautious. It is good to love as much as one can, for therein lies true strength, and he who loves much does much and is capable of much, and that which is done with love is well done. If one is moved by some book or other, for instance, just to mention something, ‘The swallow, the lark, the nightingale’, The longing for autumn, ‘From here I see a lady’, ‘Never this unique little village’ by Michelet, it’s because it’s written from the heart in simplicity and with poverty of spirit. If one were to say but few words, though ones with meaning, one would do better than to say many that were only empty sounds, and just as easy to utter as they were of little use. Love is the best and most noble thing in the human heart, especially when it has been tried and tested in life like gold in the fire, happy is he and strong in himself who has loved much and, even if he has wavered and doubted, has kept that divine fire and has returned to that which was in the beginning36 and shall never die. If only one continues to love faithfully that which is verily worthy of love, and does not squander his love on truly trivial and insignificant and faint-hearted things, then one will gradually become more enlightened and stronger. The sooner one seeks to become competent in a certain position and in a certain profession, and adopts a fairly independent way of thinking and acting, and the more one observes fixed rules, the stronger one’s character becomes, and yet that doesn’t mean that one has to become narrow-minded. It is wise to do that, for life is but short and time passes quickly. If one is competent in one thing and understands one thing well, one gains at the same time insight into and knowledge of many other things into the bargain. It’s sometimes good to go about much in the world and to be among people, and at times one is actually obliged and called upon to do so, or it can be one way of ‘throwing oneself into one’s work unreservedly and with all one’s might’, but he who actually goes quietly about his work, alone, preferring to have but very few friends, goes the most safely among people and in the world. One should never trust it when one is without difficulties or some worry or obstacle, and one shouldn’t make things too easy for oneself. Even in the most cultured circles and the best surroundings and circumstances, one should retain something of the original nature of a Robinson Crusoe41 or a savage, for otherwise one hath not root in himself, and never let the fire in his soul go out but keep it going, there will always be a time when it will come in useful. And whosoever continues to hold fast to poverty for himself, and embraces it, possesses a great treasure and will always hear the voice of his conscience speaking clearly. Whosoever hears and follows the voice in his innermost being, which is God’s best gift, ultimately finds therein a friend and is never alone. 
   Happy is he who has faith in God, for he shall overcome all of life’s difficulties in the end, though it be not without pain and sorrow. One cannot do better than to hold fast to the thought of God and endeavour to learn more of Him, amidst everything, in all circumstances, in all places and at all times; one can do this with the Bible as with all other things. It is good to go on believing that everything is miraculous, more so than one can comprehend, for that is the truth, it is good to remain sensitive and lowly and meek in heart, even though one sometimes has to hide that feeling, because that is often necessary, it is good to be very knowledgeable about the things that are hidden from the wise and prudent of the world but that are revealed as though by nature to the poor and simple, to women and babes. For what can one learn that is better than that which God has put by nature into every human soul, that which in the depths of every soul lives and loves, hopes and believes, unless one should wilfully destroy it? There, in that, is the need for nothing less than the boundless and miraculous, and a man does well if he is satisfied with nothing less and doesn’t feel at home until he has acquired it. That is the avowal that all great men have expressed in their works, all who have thought a little more deeply and have sought and worked a little harder and have loved more than others, who have launched out into the deep of the sea of life. Launching out into the deep is what we too must do if we want to catch anything, and if it sometimes happens that we have to work the whole night and catch nothing, then it is good not to give up after all but to let down the nets again at dawn. So let us simply go on quietly, each his own way, always following the light ‘sursum corda’, and as such who know that we are what others are and that others are what we are, and that it is good to have love one to another50 namely of the best kind, that believeth all things and hopeth all things, endureth all things and never faileth. And not troubling ourselves too much if we have shortcomings, for he who has none has a shortcoming nonetheless, namely that he has none, and he who thinks he is perfectly wise would do well to start over from the beginning and become a fool. We are today what we were yesterday, namely ‘honnêtes hommes’, but ones who must be tried with the fire of life53 to be innerly strengthened and confirmed in that which they are by nature through the grace of God. May it be so with us, old boy, and I wish you well on your way, and God be with you in all things, and make you succeed at that, that is what is wished you with a hearty handshake at your departure54 by Your most loving brother Vincent It’s only a very small light, the one in the room of the Sunday school in Barndesteeg, let me keep it burning;56 in any event, if I don’t do it, I don’t think that Adler is the kind of man who would let it go out. Amsterdam, May 1878 My dear Theo, It’s time you received a few words from me, Pa already wrote that you’ve arrived safely and have already written how you roamed around the city the first few days. I’m really longing to hear what your impressions are of this and that, and that’s why I urge you to write a few words as soon as you can find the time. It’s true, though, that first impressions don’t last, for we know all too well that all that glitters is not gold, and that when there is a friendly dawn there is a midnight too, and scorching and oppressive heat in the afternoon. But just as the morning hour is a blessed hour and the early bird catches the worm, so it is with first impressions, and they have their value even though they pass, for it is they which later appear to have been correct, and one comes back to them. The first thing that attracts and strikes a child is the light, and an old man also searches again fearfully for it. So write and tell me what you saw during those first few days, and what you thought. You’ll have heard that Lies didn’t pass her exam and has fallen ill, and that because she longed so much for home, Ma went to fetch her, poor girl, it will be no small disappointment for her and for everyone at home, and yesterday was perhaps a less cheerful Sunday. Pa nevertheless wrote again, and in his mouth that is the truth, that with all disappointment and at every serious moment of life, faith becomes more alive and stronger. The weather has been beautiful here the last few days, and probably in Paris too. You’ll soon notice that in the summer it’s at times rather warmer there than it is here, and you’ll probably see stormy skies like those Bonington painted. It’s really a nice neighbourhood where you live. If one roams the streets there, whether in the morning or evening, or walks in the direction of Montmartre, one is struck by many workshops and many rooms that recall ‘a cooper’ or The seamstresses or other paintings by E. Frère, and it does one good sometimes to see such things, which are simple, as one occasionally 
   sees a good many people who for various reasons have strayed a long way from everything that is natural, thereby throwing away their true and inner lives, and also many who are rooted in misery and loathsome things, because in the evening and at night one sees all manner of those dark figures walking about, both men and women, who personify, as it were, the terror of the night, and whose misery must be classified among the things that have no name in any language. Vos isn’t well, he has coughed up blood again more than once. Was there recently one afternoon when he was up, sitting hand in hand with Kee, both of them dressed in black and their faces equally pale, looking out of the window at the Church9 and the trees across the street, when there was a dark stormy sky and the leaves and the dust were whirling around in a strange way and the paving-stones looked so much whiter than usual, and the little black figures of the people stood out against them so much more sharply, as is often the case before a thunderstorm. He has become so much paler and thinner than when you saw him, and sometimes looks like a ghost. It has become a veritable house of mourning, and Uncle Stricker’s too, in fact, for when one member suffers, all the members suffer with it, for they have been planted together. Last week one of the ministers here died who was very well known throughout the country (Pantekoek). The funeral was on Saturday, it was something that reminded one of ‘In memoriam’, that procession along the path by the green borders of the Amstel. He was the father of 6 children, the eldest around 20. A very large crowd followed, literally jostling one another. Yesterday there were sermons occasioned by the event in nearly every church. Heard Uncle Stricker, among others, who had been a close acquaintance of his. It was his turn to preach in the Oudezijdskapel, where the boys from the orphanage and those from the nautical college17 usually go. There was a lot of spirit in it, spoke, among other things, of the words: Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? It was a long and terrible suffering that was his lot. Heard one of his last sermons one evening, and even then it was clearly evident from what he said that he trembled at and recoiled from each new day and night, and especially from one that followed upon the effort of preaching. Even then one couldn’t hear him without feeling for him, as it were, and one couldn’t help shuddering, for it is a dark path, the one to his long home, and happy is he who, when that darkness and night are approaching, is strengthened even then by the hope for a better life and the resurrection as we know befell Mary Magdalen and Him Whom she supposed to be the gardener in the garden by the sepulchre, by the hope: who knows what shall be on the morrow?
   Saw his son yesterday at the early service, if one can compare the faces of people with other faces, then his looks very much like an eagle, especially then, when he was stricken by what had just happened. You must try to read some beautiful book or other over there, by Michelet, for instance, on the Revolution23 or something by Thoré or T. Gautier on Paris and the time of the young painters and writers. Oh, old boy, how I’d like to roam through the city with you. Hope to take a long walk today through a neighbourhood I haven’t seen much of yet. I found the house in Breestraat where Rembrandt lived. We talked about it, you know, when you were here. Don’t forget about that painting in the Luxembourg, He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me, and write and tell me who made it. It can be so glorious in Paris in the autumn, well, you’ll be seeing something of it at the end of September. Give my warm regards to everyone at the Soeks’, I still think so often of an excursion I made with his family to Ville-d’Avray. Going into the church there, it struck me that there was, I believe, even more than one painting by Corot hanging there. You know that he spent a lot of time there. Bid good-day to Braat, and Mutters30 too. I wish you well, and write soon, and accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me ever Your most loving brother Vincent. I still have to thank you for your portrait, I’m very glad to have it, it turned out very well. Thanks for sending it. Etten, 22 July 1878 My dear Theo, I’m enclosing a note in the letter from Pa and Ma;1 was glad to hear things are still going well for you there, and that you also continue to enjoy life. How much I’d like to walk with you there. As Pa has certainly already written to you, Pa and I went to Brussels last week in the company of the Rev. Jones of Isleworth, who stayed here over Sunday. The impression we brought home from that journey was satisfactory inasmuch as we think that, with time, a place and position can be found there — that the road is most certainly shorter and less expensive than in Holland, and that it’s therefore best to fix our eyes on Belgium and to go on looking there until we find something. We saw the Flemish training college, it has a 3-year course while, as you know, in Holland the study would take another 6 years at the very least. And one is not even required to complete the training before competing for a place and position as an Evangelist. What is required is the talent to give easy, warm-hearted and popular lectures or speeches to the people, better short and to the point than long and learned. So less attention is paid to great knowledge of ancient languages and much theological study, although everything one knows about such things is a great recommendation, and more consideration is given to one’s suitability for practical work and one’s natural faith. We aren’t there yet, though, first of all because one doesn’t suddenly possess, nor can one acquire it except by much practice, the gift of speaking to the people with earnestness and feeling and without stiffness and forcedness, but naturally and as though constrained by love4 and as a master of his subject matter, knowing how to say what one has to say to the people clearly and understandably, while what one has to say must have meaning and import and strong grounds to whet his listeners’ interest in it, that they shall endeavour to let their affections take root in truth. In a word, one must be a lay preacher to succeed over there.
   Those gentlemen in Brussels wanted me to come there for a period of 3 months to make closer acquaintance, but in the long run this, too, would be costly, and that must be avoided as much as possible. It’s for this reason that at present I shall continue here in Etten to do some work as preparation, going from here from time to time to pay a visit to the Rev. Pieterszen in Mechelen6 or the Rev. De Jonge in Brussels, in so doing becoming more closely acquainted with one another. How long things go on like this depends entirely on what else they’ll say over there. Both Pa and I have just written to them again. Pa wants me to write, to the best of my ability, a theme or two to have on hand (I’m now busy, for instance, on Rembrandt’s painting ‘The carpenter’s house’ in the Louvre). Yesterday Pa had to preach at Zundert, and I went along. The Aunts9 sent you their regards, we also went to C. van Ginneken who, as you’ve probably heard, is going to marry Marie van Mens10 and has bought the Ropsentuin to put a tannery there. Was also at Jan Doomen’s, who has been suffering a lot from rheumatism in his leg, and complains that he wouldn’t even be able to walk to Breda any more, but it didn’t bother him so much working in the field or the garden, only in the morning the pain drove him to get up very early. Old age is accompanied by ailments, the old Rev. Meijjes13 would say. What an outstandingly beautiful wood engraving of ‘A young citizen of the year V’ by Jules Goupil14 was recently published in L’Illustration! Have you seen it? Have managed to get hold of one and it’s now hanging on the wall of the little room here where I’m allowed to take up residence, i.e. the classroom15 that looks out on the garden and against which the ivy grows. But regarding that painting, the magazine said this: ‘Eyes that have seen the spectacle of the dreadful guillotine, a mind that has survived all the sights of the Revolution. He is almost surprised to find himself still alive after so many disasters’. It was a remarkable presence in art and will continue to have a similar effect on many and continue to make a deep impression on those with a feeling for high art, like a portrait by Fabritius17 or some other rather mystical paintings from the school of Rembrandt.
       In the evening, when we rode back from Zundert over the heath, Pa and I walked a way, the sun set red behind the pines and the evening sky was reflected in the marshes, the heath and the yellow and white and grey sand were so resonant with tone and atmosphere. You see, there are moments in life when everything, within us too, is peace and atmosphere, and all of life seems to be like a path across the heath, though it isn’t always so. And this morning Cor, who’s on holiday, and I went to the heath and the pine-wood again, a way past Molenend, and went to fetch heather for his rabbits, which are apparently very fond of it, for it’s their natural food for a good part, as well as a thing or two to fill a flower basket. We sat for a while in the pine-wood, and together we drew a map of Etten and its surroundings with the Bremberg and Haansberg and ’t Slagveld and Geestestraat and Sprundel and Het Heike and Hoeven. Anna is but poorly, she’s so quiet and sometimes looks so very weak20 — poor sister — it seems to me that it’s better to be well and truly married than to be engaged, and I should sincerely wish for her sake that she were already safely three years or so further along in life — may God spare her and protect her from all evil, He about Whom it is written that He is our Keeper and our Shade upon our right hand. Would you give my warm regards to Soek and all his family (if you happen to go there), also to Frans Braat and Ernest22 and the others if the opportunity should arise? I think about you a lot and am so glad that things are going well for you and that you’re finding things over there that stimulate you and are, as it were, good food for the true life. That too is high art, as are the works of those who work with their heart and with their mind and spirit, just as so many you know and will perhaps meet personally, whose words and works are spirit and life. That you too, and, if possible, all of us may become more and more rooted and grounded24 in that same principle, so that our affections take root in truth, this is wished you with a hearty handshake in thought by Your most loving brother Vincent. 
    My dear Theo, I’m enclosing a few words with Pa and Ma’s letter. I, too, am again longing very much for a letter from you to come again. I sincerely hope that you’re doing as well as you possibly can over there and are seeing and hearing much that is of benefit. A postcard just arrived from the Rev. Pieterszen. I have to go to Brussels around mid-August. As no date was stipulated and Pa and Ma think it better this way — and I too, for that matter — I’ll stay here until after Anna’s wedding2 and then leave for there as soon as everything is over. Uncle Cent was here this afternoon, most likely he’ll also be writing to you soon. It was a short but pleasant visit, Aunt Cornelie continues to be miserable. Yesterday Pa went to Zundert and Ma went along — as Cor and I did for a way, as far as Sprundel Heath and walked back together. In the afternoon the Rev. Kam preached here for Pa so that Pa and Ma could stay at Zundert a bit longer for once, and weren’t in such a hurry and could also stop at Princenhage on their way home. They returned around dinner-time, just when I’d walked some distance down Leurseweg with the Rev. Kam. The evening was very enjoyable, while drinking tea we took turns reading from a book about Paul which is very beautiful. In the evenings we also occasionally read from Silas Marner by Eliot, the story of a weaver. Recently made with Cor, who made part of the sketch, a little drawing after A Sunday morning by Emile Breton5 in pen and ink and pencil. How beautiful it is, that work of his; has he made anything special this year, or do you see much of him? Wrote a theme yesterday and today on the parable of the mustard seed, which has become 27 pages long, may there be something good in it. Tomorrow morning I’m going out with Cor to fetch some greenery for the room when they register the banns. Joan is coming tomorrow evening. Our sister, though, is still far from being as one would like to see her, sometimes she still looks so pale and tense, and is always so weak.
   If only she were further along, though we cannot have it as we should like but have to take it as it comes. However, it’s better to be married than engaged, just as an ordinary day with daily work is better than a kind of holiday, once one has crossed the bridge a knot has been untied and all things have been made new, as it were, but before things reach that point there’s a time of tension, many times I even take it to be fear, which one usually has to keep to oneself, in which others can hardly share or give reassurance. As you can imagine, Pa and I quite often take walks together around the parish or to Hoeven or Leur, and Cor and I make many excursions to the heath, either to Zundert Heath or the one near Sprundel. You can understand that I really long to know how it will be in Brussels, may the work go well and also be blessed. Aunt Mina10 was here, and promised to return this summer with Uncle, may that happen, for once Anna is married things will be quiet again here at home. The fields here are so beautiful now, the wheat is being brought in and the potatoes are ripening and their leaves are beginning to wilt, and the buckwheat has beautiful white blossoms. Uncle Jan was also here, as you’ve already heard, I believe, but only very briefly. Now, old boy, I’m writing to you by the light of a lantern and the candle is becoming very short, adieu, I wish you well; if you can, write a few words with something about the painters, and if you hear something interesting about this or that, but better still would be your own impressions of whatever you like. Good-night, accept in thought a hearty handshake, and believe me ever Your loving Vincent Etten, 15 Aug. 1878 My dear Theo, I’m enclosing a few words with Pa and Ma’s letter1 to bid you good morning. It’s raining outside and has done so a lot lately, with strong winds too. It was nice the day Anna and Joan registered their banns. Now that Joan is here, Anna looks a lot more cheerful and better than before. For their honeymoon they’re thinking of making a journey through Belgium, first to Brussels and from there probably south to Liège or Chaudfontaine or the cave in Han. Wrote and told the Rev. De Jonge that I was ready to come to Brussels straightaway if work or duty should call me, but that if there were no sound reasons that made it desirable for me to go there now, I’d like to stay here another week (because of Anna’s wedding), coming in that case before Sunday, 25 Aug.
   I’m very curious to know whether the exhibition of paintings there will still be open, I should so much like to see it. Things are very sad at Princenhage, Aunt suffers a lot, and they’re all very worried about her. I long for a word from you, hope to write to you in more detail as soon as I’m in Brussels, also about the exhibition, at least if it isn’t over yet. Give my regards to Braat and Soek, if you see them, and Ernest. Adieu, I wish you the very best, not a day goes by that we don’t speak of you. Do write again soon, and accept a hearty handshake in thought from Your loving brother Vincent In haste. Laeken, Nov. 1878 My dear Theo, On the evening of the day we spent together, which for me passed as if in a twinkling, I want to write to you after all. It was a great joy for me to see and talk to you again, and it’s fortunate that such a day that passes in a twinkling and a joy of such short duration nevertheless remains in our memory, and that the remembrance of it is of a lasting nature. After we’d taken leave of each other I walked back, not the shortest way but along Trekweg. There are workshops of all kinds there that look pleasant, especially lit up in the evening, which also speak in their own way to us who are, after all, labourers and workers, each in the sphere and in the work whereunto we have been called, if only we care to listen, for they say, work while it is day, before the night cometh, when no man can work, and they remind us that the Father worketh hitherto, and that we too must work. It was the very moment when the street-sweepers were coming home with their carts with old white horses, there was a long line of those carts standing by the so-called sludge works7 at the beginning of Trekweg. Some of those old white horses resemble a certain old aquatint that you perhaps know, an engraving with no very great artistic value but which nevertheless struck me and made an impression on me. I mean the last of the series of prints titled ‘The life of a horse’. That print depicts an old white horse, emaciated and spent and worn out to death by a long life of heavy labour and much and difficult work. The poor animal stands in an indescribably lonely and forsaken place, a plain with lank, withered grass and here and there a twisted tree, bent and cracked by the storm wind. On the ground lies a skull and in the distance, in the background, the bleached skeleton of a horse lying next to a hut, where the man who slaughters horses lives. A stormy sky hangs over the whole, it’s a foul and bleak day, sombre and dark weather. It’s a sorrowful and profoundly melancholy scene that must move everyone who knows and feels that we, too, must one day go through that which we call dying, and that at the end of human life there are tears or grey hair. What lies beyond is a great mystery that God alone comprehends, who has however revealed this irrefutably in His word, that there is a resurrection of the dead. The poor horse — the old faithful servant, stands patient and submissive, but courageous nonetheless and as resolute, as it were, as the old guard who said ‘the guard dies but does not surrender’11 — waits for its final hour. I couldn’t help thinking of that print this evening when I saw those dust-cart horses. And now, as far as the drivers themselves are concerned, with their dirty, dingy clothes, they seemed to be sunk or rooted in poverty almost more deeply than that long row or rather group of poor people drawn by master Degroux in his paupers’ pew. Write and tell me if you know that print. I’d like to speak to the dustmen, if they would only come and sit in the paupers’ pew and consider it worthwhile to come and hear about the gospel and the lot of the poor and God, too, their Keeper and their Shade upon their right hand. You see, it always strikes me and it is remarkable, when we see the image of unutterable and indescribable forsakenness — of loneliness — of poverty and misery, the end of things or their extremity — the thought of God comes to mind. At least this is the case with me, and doesn’t Pa also say: There is no place I would rather speak than a cemetery, for there we are all on equal ground — there we not only stand on equal ground but there we also feel that we are standing on equal ground, and elsewhere we don’t always feel that. I’m glad that we saw the museum14 together, especially the works by Degroux15 and Leys16 and so many other remarkable paintings, such as that landscape by Coosemans, among others. I’m very happy about the two prints you gave me, but you should have let me give you that small etching, The three mills. Now you’ve paid it all yourself, not just half of it as I had so wished — you must keep it in your scrapbook, however, because it’s remarkable, even though it isn’t very well executed. In my ignorance I’d think it attributable to Peasant Bruegel rather than to Velvet Brueghel. I hereby enclose that scratch, ‘The Au charbonnage café’. I should really rather like to start making rough sketches of some of the many things one meets along the way, but considering I wouldn’t actually do it very well and it would most likely keep me from my real work, it’s better I don’t begin. As soon as I got home I began working on a sermon on ‘the barren fig tree’, Luke XIII:6-9.
   I sincerely hope that you’ll have had good days at home, that you also will have stayed over Sunday and found things well at Princenhage. When you arrive home in The Hague write a quick note if you can find the time, and be sure to give my warm regards to the Rooses. That little drawing, ‘The Au charbonnage café’ is really nothing special, but the reason I couldn’t help making it is because one sees so many coalmen, and they really are a remarkable people. This little house is not far from Trekweg, it’s actually a simple inn right next to the big workplace where the workers come in their free time to eat their bread and drink a glass of beer. Back during my time in England I applied for a position as an evangelist among the coal-miners, but they brushed my request aside and said I had to be at least 25 years old. You surely know that one of the root or fundamental truths, not only of the gospel but of the entire Bible, is ‘the light that dawns in the darkness’. From darkness to Light. Well then, who will most certainly need it, who will have an ear to hear it? Experience has taught us that those who work in darkness, in the heart of the earth like the mine-workers in the black coal-mines, among others, are very moved by the message of the gospel and also believe it. In the south of Belgium, in Hainaut, from around the area of Mons to the French borders24 and even extending far beyond them, there is a region called the Borinage, where there is one of those populations of labourers who work in the many coal-mines. I found this and other things about them in a geography book:25 The Borins (people who live in the Borinage, an area west of Mons) do nothing but mine coal. They’re an impressive sight, these coal-mines, opened up 300 metres underground, down which a working population worthy of our respect and sympathy descends every day. The coal-miner is a type peculiar to the Borinage; daylight hardly exists for him, and he scarcely enjoys the sun’s rays except on Sunday. He works with great difficulty by the light of a lamp whose illumination is pale and feeble, in a narrow gallery, his body bent double, and sometimes forced to crawl; his work is to pull from the earth’s entrails this mineral substance whose great usefulness we know, he thus works in the midst of a thousand constantly recurring dangers, but the Belgian foreman has a cheerful character, he’s used to this way of life, and when he goes down the pit, his hat topped with a little lamp whose job is to guide him in the darkness, he entrusts himself to his God Who sees his labours and Who protects him, his wife and his children. His clothing consists of a hat of boiled leather, a jacket and a pair of canvas trousers. So the Borinage lies to the south of Lessines, where one finds the stone-quarries. I should like to go there as an evangelist. The three-month trial period set by Messrs De Jonge and the Rev. Pieterszen is nearly over. Paul spent three years in Arabia before he became active as a preacher and began his great missionary journeys and his actual work among the heathens. If I could spend three years or so in a similar region, working in peace and always learning and observing, then I wouldn’t return from there without having something to say that is indeed worth hearing;29 I say this in all humility yet with frankness. If God wills it and spares my life, I’d be ready by about the age of 30 and could begin, with my special training and experience, having more mastery of my affairs and more maturity for the work than I do now. I’m writing this to you again, even though we’ve already talked about it. There are already a number of small Protestant congregations in the Borinage, and certainly schools as well, may God point me to a place where I can be active as an evangelist in the way we spoke about, by preaching the gospel to the poor, thus to those who have need of it and for whom it is suited to perfection, and devoting my time during the week to teaching.
   You’ve no doubt been to Saint-Gilles. I once took a walk from there to the ‘old boundary mark’. Where the road to Mont Saint Jean begins there’s another hill, the Alsemberg. Here, on the right, is the cemetery of Saint-Gilles, full of cedars and ivy, from which one can look out over the city. Further on one comes to Forest. The region is very picturesque there, standing on the high slopes are old houses like the huts in the dunes that Bosboom painted. One sees people doing all kinds of farm work, sowing wheat, lifting potatoes, washing turnips, and everything, right down to wood-gathering, is picturesque and looks very much like Montmartre. There are old houses with ivy or Virginia creeper and charming inns, among the houses I noticed was that of a mustard-maker, one Verkissen. His place would be perfect for a painting by Thijs Maris, for example. There are places here and there where stones are found and therefore small quarries to which sunken roads with the deep ruts of cart tracks lead, where one sees small white horses with red tassels and drivers with blue smocks, and the shepherd is not lacking, nor old women in black with white caps reminiscent of those by Degroux. There are also places here — as there are everywhere, for that matter, thank God — where one feels at home more than elsewhere, where one gets a remarkable, familiar feeling like homesickness, which has something bitterly melancholy about it but which nevertheless strengthens and awakens the spirit in us and gives us new strength and appetite for work and stimulates us, we know not how or why. That day I walked on, past Forest, and took a side road to an old church34 overgrown with ivy. I saw many lime trees, even more entwined with one another and even more Gothic, so to speak, than those we saw in the park, and at the side of the sunken road leading to the cemetery twisted bushes and the roots of trees, as gnarled as those Dürer etched in ‘Knight, Death and the Devil’. Have you ever seen a painting, or rather a photo of it, by Carlo Dolci, The Garden of Olives? There’s something Rembrandtesque about it, saw it recently. You no doubt know the large, rough etching of the same subject after Rembrandt, being the pendant of the other, Reading the Bible, with those two women and the cradle. It came to mind after you told me that you had seen the painting by père Corot of the same subject; I saw it at the exhibition of his work shortly after he died, and it moved me deeply. How much there is in art that is beautiful, if only one can remember what one has seen, one is never empty or truly lonely, and never alone. Adieu Theo, I shake your hand right heartily in thought, I wish you well, may you thrive in your work and encounter many good things on your path in life, such as stay in the memory and make us rich though we seemingly have nothing. If you see Borchers sometime, be so good as to tell him that I thank him very much for his letter of some time ago. If you go to Mauve’s, give him my regards, and believe me Your loving brother Vincent 
   I kept this letter for a couple of days. 15 Nov. has passed, so the three months are up. Spoke with the Rev. De Jonge and with Master Bokma, they say there is no opportunity to be at the school under the same conditions they offer to native Flemings — I can attend the lessons, for free if necessary — but this is the only privilege — in order to stay, therefore, I would need to have more financial means at my disposal than I do now, which is none. So I’ll probably soon try the Borinage plan. Once out of the city I shan’t easily return to a big city. It wouldn’t be easy to live without believing in Him and without having the faith of old43 in Him, and without that one would lose heart. 
    Petit-Wasmes, 26 Dec. 1878 Borinage Hainaut1 My dear Theo, It’s time I write to you again, first of all to wish you happiness at the beginning of a new year. May much good be your share, and God’s blessing be on your work in this year that we’re beginning. I’m eagerly longing for a letter from you, to hear again how things are going and how you are, also perhaps to hear if you have recently seen anything beautiful or remarkable. As far as I’m concerned, you surely understand that there are no paintings here in the Borinage, that in general they haven’t the slightest idea of what a painting is, so it goes without saying that I’ve seen absolutely nothing in the way of art since my departure from Brussels. But this doesn’t mean that this isn’t a very special and very picturesque country, everything speaks, as it were, and is full of character. There was snow these last few days, the dark days before Christmas. Then everything was reminiscent of the medieval paintings by Peasant Bruegel, among others, and by so many others who were so good at expressing the singular effect of red and green, black and white. Time and again, what one sees here reminds one of the work of Thijs Maris or Albrecht Dürer, for example. There are sunken roads here, overgrown with thorn-bushes and with old, twisted trees with their gnarled roots, which look exactly like that road in the etching by Dürer, The knight and Death. These last few days, for instance, it was an extraordinary sight, with the white snow in the evening around the twilight hour, seeing the workers returning home from the mines. These people are completely black when they come out of the dark mines into the daylight again, they look just like chimney-sweeps. Their houses are usually small and could better be called huts, scattered along the sunken roads and in the wood and against the slopes of the hills. One sees moss-covered roofs here and there, and the light shines kindly in the evening through the small-paned windows.
   Just as in Brabant we have the copse and the oak wood, and in Holland the pollard willows, so here one sees those black thorn-bushes around the gardens, fields and land. The recent snow gave it the effect of letters written on white paper, like the pages of the gospel. I’ve already spoken here at various times, both in a fairly large room, specially furnished for religious meetings, and in the gatherings that are customarily held in the workers’ houses in the evenings, which one can best call Bible-reading. Spoke, among other things, on: the parable of the mustard seed, the barren fig tree, the man who was blind from his birth. On Christmas, of course, on the stable of Bethlehem, and Peace on earth. May it come to pass with God’s blessing that I be placed here permanently somewhere; I should sincerely wish it. Everywhere around here one sees the big chimneys and the huge mountains of coal at the entrance to the mines, the so-called coal-pits. You know that large drawing by Bosboom, Chaudfontaine, it conveys the character of the land here well, only here everything is coal, in the north of Hainaut stone-quarries, and Chaudfontaine more iron ore. I still think so often of that day when you were in Brussels and of our visit to the Museum. And I often wish that you were a bit closer and we could be together more often. Do write again soon. Again and again I look at that etching of A young citizen. The mine-workers’ language is not all that easy to understand, but they understand normal French well if one can speak it rapidly and fluently, then it naturally resembles their dialect, which is spoken amazingly fast. At a gathering this week I spoke on the text 
   Acts XVI:9 ‘And a vision appeared to Paul in the night; There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us.’13 And they listened attentively when I tried to describe what that Macedonian was like who needed and longed for the comfort of the gospel and the knowledge of the Only True God. How we should imagine him as a worker with signs of sorrow and suffering and fatigue on his face, without form or glory but with an immortal soul that has need of the meat which endureth unto everlasting life, namely the Word of God, for man cannot live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. How Jesus Christ is the Master16 who can strengthen, comfort and enlighten a man like the Macedonian, a workman and labourer who has a hard life. Because He himself is the great Man of Sorrows, who knows our diseases, who himself is called the carpenter’s son, even though He was the Son of God and the great physician of sick souls. Who worked for 30 years in a humble carpenter’s workshop to carry out God’s will; and God wants man to live and walk humbly upon the earth, in imitation of Christ, minding not high things, but condescending to men of low estate, learning from the gospel to be meek and lowly in heart. I’ve already had the opportunity to visit a few sick people, for many people here are ill. Wrote today to the president of the Comité d’Evangelisation23 to request that my case be brought before the next meeting of the committee. It thawed last night, I cannot tell you how picturesque the hilly countryside looks in the thaw, now that the snow is melting and the black fields with the green of the winter wheat are again becoming visible. For foreigners the villages here are truly a maze, with countless narrow streets and alleyways with the small houses of the workers, at the foot of the hills as well as on their slopes and at the top. It can best be compared to a village like Scheveningen, especially the poor quarters, or to those villages in Brittany that we know from paintings. For that matter, you rode through this region yourself on the railway journey to and from Paris, and maybe remember it a little. The Protestant churches are small, similar to the one in Hoeven, but slightly larger, but where I spoke was only a simple, large room that can hold a hundred people if necessary. I also attended a service in a stable or barn, so it’s quite simple and novel. Write soon when you have the time, and remember that you are repeatedly, even constantly, in my thoughts. Wishing again that God’s best blessings may be your share in the new year, and shaking your hand in thought, believe me ever Your most loving brother Vincent Give my regards to everyone at the Rooses’ and wish them all, and anyone who should happen to ask after me, a happy New Year.  If you write, please address your letter care of M. Vanderhaegen, Colporteur à Pâturages près de Mons (Borinage Haînaut).  I just visited an old mother in a charcoal-burner’s family. She’s seriously ill, but pious and patient. I read a chapter to her and prayed with all of them. The people here have something special and appealing because of their simplicity and kind-heartedness, just like the Brabanters in Zundert and Etten. My dear Theo, I heard from Pa and Ma that they were recently surprised by a visit from you, just when Pa had returned from here. I’m very glad that Pa was here. Together we visited the 3 ministers of the Borinage3 and walked through the snow and visited a miner’s family and saw coal being hauled up from a mine called Les trois Diefs (the three heaps of earth)4 and Pa attended two Bible readings, so we did a great deal in those couple of days. I believe that Pa received an impression of the Borinage that he won’t easily forget, as it would be with anyone who visited this singular, remarkable and picturesque region of the country. It’s been a long time since I wrote to you. If, with God’s blessing, I succeed in getting settled here, then you must come here sometime, perhaps when you have to go to Paris again, or tying it in with a business trip. I recently found in the house of an elderly man who had worked in the mines for many years a list of all the seams of coal south of Mons, which are 155 in number. The country and the people here appeal to me more each day, one has here a familiar feeling as though on the heath or in the dunes, there’s something simple and kind-hearted about the people. Those who have left here are homesick for their country, just as, conversely, foreigners who are homesick may come to feel at home here.
   How are Mauve and Maris? Have you seen a lot lately? The spring that is beginning will renew and change their subject matter. What did Israëls make this winter? How much they would notice here that would make an impression on them! When the cart with a white horse (l’blanc ch’val) brings an injured man home from the mine, one sees things that remind one of Israëls’s shipwreck, and over and over again there is something that moves one. Write a few words soon, and remember that if you tell me about the painters, I still understand something of it, even though it’s been a long time since I’ve seen many paintings. Have rented a small house where I’d really like to live entirely on my own, but which now serves only as a workplace or study, because Pa thinks it better that I board with Denis, and I do too. I have prints on the wall there and all sorts of things. I have to go out and visit the sick as well as the healthy. Write soon, and I wish you the very best. Give my regards to Mauve, if you see him, and to your housemates. Spring is beginning, for one hears larks here, and in the woods the branches and buds are beginning to sprout, especially the alders, but when Pa was here everything was covered with snow, so that Pa saw the singular effect of the black coal-pits and the many black chimneys in the snow. There are many places here that remind one of that drawing by Bosboom, Chaudfontaine. Adieu, a handshake in thought, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Wasmes, April 1879 My dear Theo, It’s time that you hear something from me again. I heard from home that you were in Etten for a couple of days and that you were travelling for the firm. I sincerely hope that your trip went well. These days you’ll no doubt be in the dunes and in Scheveningen now and then. Here it’s also attractive in the country in the spring; here and there are places where one could imagine oneself in the dunes, because of the hills. I went on a very interesting excursion not long ago; the fact is, I spent 6 hours in a mine. In one of the oldest and most dangerous mines in the area no less, called Marcasse. This mine has a bad name because many die in it, whether going down or coming up, or by suffocation or gas exploding, or because of water in the ground, or because of old passageways caving in and so on. It’s a sombre place, and at first sight everything around it has something dismal and deathly about it. The workers there are usually people, emaciated and pale owing to fever, who look exhausted and haggard, weather-beaten and prematurely old, the women generally sallow and withered. All around the mine are poor miners’ dwellings with a couple of dead trees, completely black from the smoke, and thorn-hedges, dung-heaps and rubbish dumps, mountains of unusable coal &c. Maris4 would make a beautiful painting of it. Later I’ll try and make a sketch of it to give you an idea of it.
   Had a good guide, a man who has already worked there for 33 years, a friendly and patient man who explained everything clearly and tried to make it understandable. We went down together, 700 metres deep this time, and went into the most hidden corners of that underworld. The maintenages or gradins (cells where the miners work) that are farthest removed from the exit are called ‘des caches’ (hidden places, places where one searches). This mine has 5 levels, 3 of which, the uppermost ones, are exhausted and abandoned, one no longer works in them because there’s no more coal. If anyone were to try and make a painting of the maintenages, that would be something new and something unheard-of or rather never-before-seen. Imagine a series of cells in a rather narrow and low passageway, supported by rough timber-work. In each of the cells is a worker in a coarse linen suit, dingy and soiled as a chimney-sweep, chipping away at the coal by the dim light of a small lamp. In some of the cells the worker stands upright, in others (‘seams worked lying down’) he lies flat on the ground.  The arrangement is more or less like the cells in a beehive, or like a dark, sombre passageway in an underground prison, or like a series of small looms, or actually they look like a row of ovens such as one sees among the peasants, or like the separate tombs in a vault. The passageways themselves are like the large chimneys of the Brabant farmsteads. In some, water leaks in everywhere and the light of the miner’s lamp creates a peculiar effect and reflects as in a cave full of stalactites. Some of the miners work in the maintenages, others load the loosened coal into small wagons that are transported along rails resembling a tramway. It’s mostly children who do this, both boys and girls. There’s also a stable there, 700 metres below ground, with around 7 old horses that transport larger amounts, bringing them to the so-called accrochage, that being the place where they’re hauled up. Other workers are busy restoring the antiquated passageways to prevent them from caving in, or are making new passageways in the coal seam. Just as sailors on land are homesick for the sea, despite all the dangers and difficulties that threaten them, so the mine-worker would rather be below ground than above. The villages here have something forsaken and still and extinct about them, because life goes on underground instead of above. One could be here for years, but unless one has been down in the mines one has no clear picture of what goes on here. The people here are very uneducated and ignorant, and most of them can’t read, yet they’re shrewd and nimble in their difficult work, courageous, of rather small build but square-shouldered, with sombre, deep-set eyes. They’re skilled at many things and work amazingly hard. Very nervous dispositions, I mean not weak but sensitive. Have a festering and deep-rooted hatred and an innate distrust of anyone who tries to boss them around. With charcoal-burners one must have a charcoal-burner’s nature and character, and no pretensions, pridefulness or imperiousness, otherwise one can’t get on with them and could never win their trust.
   Did I tell you at the time about the miner who was badly burned by a gas explosion? Thank God he has now recovered and goes out and about and is beginning to take long walks as practice, his hands are still weak and it will be some time before he’s able to use them for his work, yet he has been saved. But since then there have been quite a few cases of typhus and virulent fever, including what is known as ‘foolish fever’, which causes one to have bad dreams such as nightmares and delirium. So there are again many sickly and bedridden people, lying emaciated on their beds, weak and miserable. In one house everyone is sick with fever, and they have little or no help, which means that there the sick are taking care of the sick. ‘Here it is the sick who nurse the sick,’ said the woman, just as it is the poor who befriend the poor. Have you seen anything beautiful recently? I’m eagerly longing for a letter from you. Has Israëls been working a lot lately, and Maris and Mauve? A couple of nights ago a foal was born in the stable here, a nice small creature that was quick to stand firmly on its feet. The workers keep a lot of goats here, and there are young ones in the houses everywhere, just like the rabbits commonly to be found in the workers’ houses. Must go out and visit the sick, so have to finish now, let me hear from you soon, to give a sign of life, should you have the time. Give my regards to your housemates, and to Mauve when you get the chance, I wish you the very best, and believe me ever, with a handshake in thought, Your loving brother Vincent Going down in a mine is an unpleasant business, in a kind of basket or cage like a bucket in a well, but then a well 500-700 metres deep, so that down there, looking upward, the daylight appears to be about as big as a star in the sky. One has a feeling similar to one’s first time on a ship at sea, but worse, though fortunately it doesn’t last long. The workers get used to it, but even so, they never shake off an unconquerable feeling of horror and dread that stays with them, not without reason or unjustifiably. Once down there, however, it isn’t so bad, and the effort is richly rewarded by what one sees. Address Vincent van Gogh c/o Jean-Baptiste Denis rue du Petit-Wasmes Wasmes (Borinage, Hainaut) Wasmes, June 1879 My dear Theo, It’s already rather late, i.e. nearly 12 o’clock, but I still want to write a few words to you today. First of all, because it was such a long time ago that I wrote to you — but old chap, what should I write to you? — am swamped with all kinds of work here, so that the days pass by, but often one doesn’t even have time to think or do things that would otherwise appeal to one. But what particularly compels me to write is what I heard from home, namely that they’ve offered to send you to Paris for 6 weeks. If you go there, you’ll pass by the Borinage. Wouldn’t you consider spending a day here, or longer if possible? I’d so much like you to know this country, because there’s so very much that’s unique to be noticed by those who look at things closely. Wouldn’t it be remarkable for someone who had never seen a seaside village to see Scheveningen or Katwijk3 or some other village? Well then — there’s no sea here, but the character of all things is interesting and worth getting to know. So should you feel the desire and are so inclined, and can find the time and opportunity, please stop over here, but write ahead of time when you’re coming and whereabouts I can find you, at which station and on which train. I’ll give this letter to Ma when she comes, because in all likelihood I’ll be meeting her when she returns from Paris. Am eagerly longing to see her. Fortunately for Uncle, the danger seems to have been averted5 for the time being. What affected me deeply was hearing that Frans Soek died, I’d like to hear some particulars in the matter from you, if you happen to know anything, poor chap, life wasn’t easy for him, but rather quite a struggle. We had a terrible storm here a couple of days ago, around 11 o’clock in the evening. There’s a place nearby where one can see in the distance, below, a large part of the Borinage, with the chimneys, mountains of coal, small workers’ houses, small black figures moving about during the day as though in an ants’ nest, in the far distance dark fir woods with small white workers’ houses in front of them, a couple of little towers in the distance, an old mill &c. Usually a sort of fog hangs over it, or else there’s the fanciful effect of light and shade owing to the shadows of clouds that remind one of paintings by Rembrandt or Michel or Ruisdael. But on the occasion of that storm in the pitch-black night, it was a special effect caused by the flashes of lightning that made everything visible just for a moment now and then. Nearby, the large, sombre buildings of the Marcasse mine, standing alone and set apart on the flat field, which that night, during the violent rains, truly reminded one of the hulk of Noah’s ark, as it would have appeared in the darkness of the Flood by the light of a lightning flash.
   Inspired by the impression made by that storm, I included a description of a shipwreck in the Bible reading this evening. Am currently reading Uncle Tom’s cabin9 a lot — there’s still so much slavery in the world — and in that astonishingly beautiful book this extremely momentous matter is treated with such wisdom, with a love and a zeal and interest in the genuine welfare of the poor and oppressed, that one can’t help coming back to it again and again and finding more in it each time. I know no better definition of the word Art than this, ‘Art is man added to nature’, nature, reality, truth, but with a meaning, with an interpretation, with a character that the artist brings out and to which he gives expression, which he sets free, which he unravels, releases, elucidates. A painting by Mauve or Maris or Israëls speaks more and more clearly than nature itself. So it is with books as well, and in Uncle Tom’s cabin in particular, things have been put in a new light by the artist, and thus in that book, even though it’s already beginning to be an old book, i.e. one written years ago, all things are made new. It’s so subtly felt, it’s so well worked out, it’s so masterly. It was written with so much love, so much seriousness and so faithful to the truth and with knowledge of the subject. It’s so humble and simple but at the same time so truly sublime, so noble and so distinguished. Recently read a book about the English coal-mining district, but it didn’t give very many details. Herewith a woodcut for your scrapbook. Lately made the acquaintance of someone who supervised the workers for years. Is of humble origins but worked his way up. Now he has a chest complaint, quite serious, and can no longer stand the terribly exhausting work down in the mine. It’s very important to hear him talk about the subject. He has always remained the workmen’s friend (in contrast to many others who worked their way up, not because of true distinction but because of money, driven by motives less noble and many times more base). He has a labourer’s heart, true and honest and courageous, but is far above most of them as regards intellectual development. On more than one occasion during a strike, he was the only person who could exert any influence on the workers. They would hear no one, they would listen to no one but him, and at the critical moment no one was obeyed but him alone. When I met him for the first time, I thought of the etching after Meissonier, with which you are familiar, The reader.
   One of Denis’s boys is as good as engaged to his daughter, which is why he comes here to the house, though but seldom, and I made his acquaintance. Since then I’ve visited him a few times. Have you ever read Legouvé’s Les pères et les enfants, that’s a remarkable book, found it there in the house and read it with interest. Received a letter a few days ago from the Rev. Jones of Isleworth in which he writes about the building of wooden churches here in the Borinage. Is it feasible? Is it desirable? He has a mind to work towards that goal, i.e. erecting the first of such buildings. Even talks about coming over here sometime in the autumn to discuss the matter. I truly wish that such a thing may come to pass. Write a few words if you have time, and if you can, stop here on your way to Paris. In any event, let me know if possible on which train you’ll be passing through one of the railway stations in the vicinity of Wasmes, and which station, because I’ll do my best to be there. Blessings on your work, and believe me ever Your loving brother Vincent Cuesmes, 5 Aug. 1879 My dear Theo, I’m writing to you in haste. Won’t you be going to Paris quite soon now? If so, write and tell me which day and what time, and in all likelihood I’ll see you at the station. If you have time to stay here for a day, or longer or shorter, I sincerely wish that this could happen. Would be able to show you some drawings, types from here, not that they alone make it worth your while to get off the train, but here you would easily find something that appeals to you in the scenery and in the singularity of everything, for there’s so much picturesque character in everything in this region. Have you ever read Dickens, ‘Les temps difficiles’, I’m giving you the title in French because there’s a very good French translation for 1. francs published by Hachette, Bibliothèque des meilleurs romans étranger. It’s masterly, one of the characters is a worker, Stephen Blackpool, who’s well portrayed and extremely likeable. Was recently in Brussels and Maria-Horebeke and Tournai, partly on foot. Am at the following address at the moment Mr Francq. Evangelist in CUESMES5 (at Marais, near Mons). There have been a lot of storms here lately. Come on, old chap, if you can arrange it, come and stay over till the next train. Was recently in a studio, the Rev. Pieterszen’s, who paints in the style of Schelfhout or Hoppenbrouwers7 and really understands art. He asked me for one of my sketches, a mine-worker’s type. Often sit up drawing until late at night to have some keepsakes and to strengthen thoughts that automatically spring to mind upon seeing the things.
   But old boy, I don’t have any time, had to write urgently to Mr Tersteeg to thank him for the box of paints he sent and the sketchbook, already half full. In Brussels I bought another large sketchbook with old Dutch paper from a Jewish bookseller. If I should get to see you, how pleased I’d be, I promise you Dickens, Les temps difficiles, if you want to come and fetch it, but otherwise I’ll send it when I get the chance. Adieu, accept a handshake in thought, and believe me ever Yours truly, Vincent  My dear Theo, It’s mainly to tell you that I’m grateful for your visit1 that I’m writing to you. It was quite a long time ago that we saw each other or wrote to each other as we used to. All the same, it’s better that we feel something for each other rather than behave like corpses towards one another, the more so because as long as one has no real right to be called a corpse by being legally dead, it smacks of hypocrisy or at least childishness to pose as such. Childish in the manner of a young man of 14 years who thinks that his dignity and social standing actually oblige him to wear a top hat. The hours we spent together in this way have at least assured us that we’re both still in the land of the living. When I saw you again and took a walk with you, I had the same feeling I used to have more than I do now, as though life were something good and precious that one should cherish, and I felt more cheerful and alive than I had been for a long time, because in spite of myself life has gradually become or has seemed much less precious to me, much more unimportant and indifferent. When one lives with others and is bound by a feeling of affection one is aware that one has a reason for being, that one might not be entirely worthless and superfluous but perhaps good for one thing or another, considering that we need one another and are making the same journey as travelling companions. Proper self-respect, however, is also very dependent on relations with others. A prisoner who’s kept in isolation, who’s prevented from working &c., would in the long run, especially if this were to last too long, suffer the consequences just as surely as one who went hungry for too long. Like everyone else, I have need of relationships of friendship or affection or trusting companionship, and am not like a street pump or lamp-post, whether of stone or iron, so that I can’t do without them without perceiving an emptiness and feeling their lack, like any other generally civilized and highly respectable man — and I tell you these things to let you know what a salutary effect your visit had on me. And just as I wished that we not drift apart, this is also the case with regard to those at home. Even so, at the moment I really dread going there and am strongly inclined to stay here. It could, however, be my fault, and you could be right in thinking that I don’t see things straight, which is why it may be that, despite my great reluctance and notwithstanding that it’s a hard journey, I’m going to Etten for at least a few days. As I think back on your visit with thankfulness, our talks naturally come to mind. I’ve heard such talks before, many, in fact, and often. Plans for improvement and change and raising the spirits — and yet, don’t let it anger you, I’m a little afraid of them — also because I sometimes acted upon them and ended up rather disappointed. How much has been well thought out that is, however, impracticable. The time spent at Amsterdam is still so fresh in my memory. You were there yourself, and so you know how the pros and cons were weighed, considered and deliberated upon, reasoned with wisdom, how it was well meant — and yet how pitiful the result, how daft the whole business, how grossly stupid. I still shudder at the thought. 
   It was the worst time I’ve ever gone through. How desirable and appealing the rather difficult and troubled days here in this poor country, in these primitive surroundings, seem to me compared with then. Something similar, I fear, will be the result of following wise counsel given with the best of intentions. For such experiences are pretty drastic for me. The damage, the sorrow, the heart’s regretfulness is too great for both of us not to have learned the hard way. If we don’t learn from this, what shall we then learn from? A striving such as reaching the goal set before me, as it was put then, truly that is an ambition that won’t easily take hold of me again, the desire to achieve it has cooled considerably, and I now look at things from a different perspective, even though it may sound and look attractive, and even though it’s unacceptable to think about it as experience taught me to think about it. Unacceptable, yes, just as, for example, Francq the Evangelist finds it unacceptable that I declared the sermons given by the Rev. Jean Andry3 to be only slightly more evangelical than the sermons of a priest. I would rather die a natural death than be prepared for it by the academy, and have occasionally had a lesson from a grass-mower4 that seemed to me more useful than one in Greek. Improvement in my life — should I not desire it or should I not be in need of improvement? I really want to improve. But it’s precisely because I yearn for it that I’m afraid of remedies that are worse than the disease. Can you blame a sick person if he looks the doctor straight in the eye and prefers not to be treated wrongly or by a quack? Does someone who has consumption or typhus do wrong by maintaining that a stronger remedy than barley water might be useful or even necessary, or, finding that barley water in itself can do no harm, nevertheless doubts its efficacy and potency in his particular case? The doctor who prescribed barley water mustn’t say, this patient is a stubborn person who is set upon his own ruin because he doesn’t want to take medicine — no, because the man is not unwilling, but the so-called medicine was unsuitable, because it was indeed ‘it’ but still not yet ‘it’ at all. Do you blame someone if he fails to be moved by a painting which is recorded in the catalogue as a Memling but which has nothing to do with Memling other than that it’s a similar subject from the Gothic period but without artistic value? And if you should now assume from what I’ve said that I intended to say you were a quack because of your advice then you will have completely misunderstood me, since I have no such idea or opinion of you. If, on the other hand, you think that I thought I would do well to take your advice literally and become a lithographer of invoice headings and visiting cards, or a bookkeeper or a carpenter’s apprentice — likewise that of my very dear sister Anna to devote myself to the baker’s trade or many other things of that kind (quite remarkably diverse and mutually exclusive) — which it was suggested I pursue, you would also be mistaken.
   But, you say, I’m not giving you this advice for you to follow to the letter, but because I thought you had a taste for idling and because I was of the opinion that you should put an end to it. Might I be allowed to point out to you that such idling is really a rather strange sort of idling. It’s rather difficult for me to defend myself on this score, but I would be sorry if you couldn’t eventually see this in a different light. I also don’t know if I would do well to counter such accusations by following the advice to become a baker, for example. That would really be a sufficient answer (supposing it were possible for us to assume the guise of a baker or hair-cutter or librarian with lightning speed) and yet actually a foolish response, rather like the way the man acted who, when accused of heartlessness because he was sitting on a donkey, immediately dismounted and continued on his way with the donkey on his shoulders. And, joking apart, I honestly think it would be better if the relationship between us were more trusting on both sides. If I must seriously feel that I’m annoying or burdensome to you or those at home, useful for neither one thing nor another, and were to go on being forced to feel like an intruder or a fifth wheel in your presence, so that it would be better I weren’t there, and if I should have to continue trying to keep further and further out of other people’s way — if I think that indeed it would be so and cannot be otherwise, then I’m overcome by a feeling of sorrow and I must struggle against despair. It’s difficult for me to bear these thoughts and more difficult still to bear the thought that so much discord, misery and sorrow, in our midst and in our family, has been caused by me. If it were indeed so, then I’d truly wish that it be granted me not to have to go on living too long. Yet whenever this depresses me beyond measure, all too deeply, after a long time the thought also occurs to me: it’s perhaps only a bad, terrible dream, and later we’ll perhaps learn to understand and comprehend it better. But is it not, after all, reality, and won’t it one day become better rather than worse? To many it would no doubt appear foolish and superstitious to believe in any improvement for the better. Sometimes in winter it’s so bitterly cold that one says, it’s simply too cold, what do I care whether summer comes, the bad outweighs the good. But whether we like it or not, an end finally comes to the hard frost, and one fine morning the wind has turned and we have a thaw. Comparing the natural state of the weather with our state of mind and our circumstances, subject to variableness and change, I still have some hope that it can improve. If you write, soon perhaps, you will make me happy. Just in case, address your letter care of J.Bte Denis, rue du Petit-Wasmes à Wasmes (Hainaut). Walked to Wasmes after your departure that evening. Have since drawn a portrait. Adieu, accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, It’s with some reluctance that I write to you, not having done so for so long, and that for many a reason. Up to a certain point you’ve become a stranger to me, and I too am one to you, perhaps more than you think; perhaps it would be better for us not to go on this way. It’s possible that I wouldn’t even have written to you now if it weren’t that I’m under the obligation, the necessity, of writing to you. If, I say, you yourself hadn’t imposed that necessity. I learned at Etten2 that you had sent fifty francs for me; well, I accepted them. Certainly reluctantly, certainly with a rather melancholy feeling, but I’m in some sort of impasse or mess; what else can one do? And so it’s to thank you for it that I’m writing to you. As you may perhaps know, I’m back in the Borinage; my father spoke to me of staying in the vicinity of Etten instead; I said no, and I believe I acted thus for the best. Without wishing to, I’ve more or less become some sort of impossible and suspect character in the family, in any event, somebody who isn’t trusted, so how, then, could I be useful to anybody in any way? That’s why, first of all, so I’m inclined to believe, it is beneficial and the best and most reasonable position to take, for me to go away and to remain at a proper distance, as if I didn’t exist. What moulting is to birds, the time when they change their feathers, that’s adversity or misfortune, hard times, for us human beings. One may remain in this period of moulting, one may also come out of it renewed, but it’s not to be done in public, however; it’s scarcely entertaining, it’s not cheerful, so it’s a matter of making oneself scarce. Well, so be it. Now, although it may be a thing of rather demoralizing difficulty to regain the trust of an entire family perhaps not entirely devoid of prejudices and other similarly honourable and fashionablea qualities, nevertheless, I’m not utterly without hope that little by little, slowly and surely, a good understanding may be re-established with this person and that. In the first place, then, I’d like to see this good understanding, to say no more, re-established between my father and me, and I would also be very keen that it be re-established between the two of us. Good understanding is infinitely better than misunderstanding. I must now bore you with certain abstract things; however, I’d like you to listen to them patiently. I, for one, am a man of passions, capable of and liable to do rather foolish things for which I sometimes feel rather sorry. I do often find myself speaking or acting somewhat too quickly when it would be better to wait more patiently. I think that other people may also sometimes do similar foolish things. Now that being so, what’s to be done, must one consider oneself a dangerous man, incapable of anything at all? I don’t think so. But it’s a matter of trying by every means to turn even these passions to good account. For example, to name one passion among others, I have a more or less irresistible passion for books, and I have a need continually to educate myself, to study, if you like, precisely as I need to eat my bread. You’ll be able to understand that yourself. When I was in different surroundings, in surroundings of paintings and works of art, you well know that I then took a violent passion for those surroundings that went as far as enthusiasm. And I don’t repent it, and now, far from the country again, I often feel homesick for the country of paintings.
   You may perhaps clearly remember that I knew very well (and it may well be that I still know) what Rembrandt was or what Millet was, or Jules Dupré or Delacroix or Millais or M. Maris. Good — now I no longer have those surroundings — however, that something that’s called soul, they claim that it never dies and that it lives for ever and seeks for ever and for ever and for evermore. So instead of succumbing to homesickness, I said to myself, one’s country or native land is everywhere. So instead of giving way to despair, I took the way of active melancholy as long as I had strength for activity, or in other words, I preferred the melancholy that hopes and aspires and searches to the one that despairs, mournful and stagnant. So I studied the books I had to hand rather seriously, such as the Bible and Michelet’s La révolution Française, and then last winter, Shakespeare and a little V. Hugo and Dickens and Beecher Stowe, and then recently Aeschylus, and then several other less classic authors, several good minor masters. You well know that one who is ranked among the minor (?) masters is called Fabritius or Bida. Now the man who is absorbed in all that is sometimes shocking,b to others, and without wishing to, offends to a greater or lesser degree against certain forms and customs and social conventions. It’s a pity, though, when people take that in bad part. For example, you well know that I’ve frequently neglected my appearance, I admit it, and I admit that it’s shocking.c But look, money troubles and poverty have something to do with it, and then a profound discouragement also has something to do with it, and then it’s sometimes a good means of ensuring for oneself the solitude needed to be able to go somewhat more deeply into this or that field of study with which one is preoccupied. One very necessary field of study is medicine; there’s hardly a man who doesn’t try to know a little bit about it, who doesn’t try to understand at least what it’s about, and here I still don’t know anything at all about it. But all of that absorbs you, but all of that preoccupies you, but all of that makes you dream, ponder, think. And now for as much as 5 years, perhaps, I don’t know exactly, I’ve been more or less without a position, wandering hither and thither. Now you say, from such and such a time you’ve been going downhill, you’ve faded away, you’ve done nothing. Is that entirely true? It’s true that sometimes I’ve earned my crust of bread, sometimes some friend has given me it as a favour; I’ve lived as best I could, better or worse, as things went; it’s true that I’ve lost several people’s trust, it’s true that my financial affairs are in a sorry state, it’s true that the future’s not a little dark, it’s true that I could have done better, it’s true that just in terms of earning my living I’ve lost time, it’s true that my studies themselves are in a rather sorry and disheartening state, and that I lack more, infinitely more than I have. But is that called going downhill, and is that called doing nothing? Perhaps you’ll say, but why didn’t you continue as people would have wished you to continue, along the university road?  To that I’d say only this, it costs too much and then, that future was no better than the present one, on the road that I’m on. 
   But on the road that I’m on I must continue; if I do nothing, if I don’t study, if I don’t keep on trying, then I’m lost, then woe betide me. That’s how I see this, to keep on, keep on, that’s what’s needed. But what’s your ultimate goal, you’ll say. That goal will become clearer, will take shape slowly and surely, as the croquis becomes a sketch and the sketch a painting, as one works more seriously, as one digs deeper into the originally vague idea, the first fugitive, passing thought, unless it becomes firm. You must know that it’s the same with evangelists as with artists. There’s an old, often detestable, tyrannical academic school, the abomination of desolation, in fact — men having, so to speak, a suit of armour, a steel breastplate of prejudices and conventions. Those men, when they’re in charge of things, have positions at their disposal, and by a system of circumlocution11 seek to support their protégés, and to exclude the natural man from among them. Their God is like the God of Shakespeare’s drunkard, Falstaff, ‘the inside of a church’;12 d in truth, certain evangelical (???) gentlemen find themselves, by a strange conjunction (perhaps they themselves, if they were capable of human feeling, would be somewhat surprised) find themselves holding the very same point of view as the drunkard in spiritual matters. But there’s little fear that their blindness will ever turn into clear-sightedness on the subject. This state of affairs has its bad side for someone who doesn’t agree with all that, and who protests against it with all his heart and with all his soul and with all the indignation of which he is capable. Myself, I respect academicians who are not like those academicians, but the respectable ones are more thinly scattered than one would believe at first glance. Now one of the reasons why I’m now without a position, why I’ve been without a position for years, it’s quite simply because I have different ideas from these gentlemen who give positions to individuals who think like them. It’s not a simple matter of appearance, as people have hypocritically held it against me, it’s something more serious than that, I assure you. Why am I telling you all this? — not to grumble, not to apologize for things in which I may be more or less wrong, but quite simply to tell you this: on your last visit, last summer, when we walked together near the disused mine they call La Sorcière, you reminded me that there was a time when we also walked together near the old canal and mill of Rijswijk, and then, you said, we were in agreement on many things, but, you added — you’ve really changed since then, you’re not the same any more. Well, that’s not quite how it is; what has changed is that my life was less difficult then and my future less dark, but as far as my inner self, as far as my way of seeing and thinking are concerned, they haven’t changed. But if in fact there were a change, it’s that now I think and I believe and I love more seriously what then, too, I already thought, I believed and I loved. So it would be a misunderstanding if you were to persist in believing that, for example, I would be less warm now towards Rembrandt or Millet or Delacroix, or whomever or whatever, because it’s the opposite. But you see, there are several things that are to be believed and to be loved; there’s something of Rembrandt in 
  Shakespeare17 and something of Correggio or Sarto in Michelet, and something of Delacroix in V. Hugo, and in Beecher Stowe there’s something of Ary Scheffer. And in Bunyan there’s something of M. Maris or of Millet, a reality more real than reality, so to speak, but you have to know how to read him; then there are extraordinary things in him, and he knows how to say inexpressible things; and then there’s something of Rembrandt in the Gospels or of the Gospels in Rembrandt, as you wish, it comes to more or less the same, provided that one understands it rightly, without trying to twist it in the wrong direction, and if one bears in mind the equivalents of the comparisons, which make no claim to diminish the merits of the original figures. If now you can forgive a man for going more deeply into paintings, admit also that the love of books is as holy as that of Rembrandt, and I even think that the two complement each other. I really love the portrait of a man by Fabritius, which one day, also while taking a walk together, we looked at for a long time in the Haarlem museum. Good, but I love Dickens’s ‘Richard Cartone’ in his Paris et Londres en 1793 just as much, and I could show you other strangely vivid figures in yet other books, with more or less striking resemblance. And I think that Kent, a man in Shakespeare’s King Lear, is just as noble and distinguished a character as any figure of Th. de Keyser, although Kent and King Lear20 are supposed to have lived a long time earlier. To put it no higher, my God, how beautiful that is. Shakespeare — who is as mysterious as he? — his language and his way of doing things are surely the equal of any brush trembling with fever and emotion. But one has to learn to read, as one has to learn to see and learn to live. So you mustn’t think that I’m rejecting this or that; in my unbelief I’m a believer, in a way, and though having changed I am the same, and my torment is none other than this, what could I be good for, couldn’t I serve and be useful in some way, how could I come to know more thoroughly, and go more deeply into this subject or that? Do you see, it continually torments me, and then you feel a prisoner in penury, excluded from participating in this work or that, and such and such necessary things are beyond your reach. Because of that, you’re not without melancholy, and you feel emptiness where there could be friendship and high and serious affections, and you feel a terrible discouragement gnawing at your psychic energy itself, and fate seems able to put a barrier against the instincts for affection, or a tide of revulsion that overcomes you. And then you say, How long, O Lord!22 Well, then, what can I say; does what goes on inside show on the outside? Someone has a great fire in his soul and nobody ever comes to warm themselves at it, and passers-by see nothing but a little smoke at the top of the chimney and then go on their way. So now what are we to do, keep this fire alive inside, have salt in ourselves, wait patiently, but with how much impatience, await the hour, I say, when whoever wants to, will come and sit down there, will stay there, for all I know? May whoever believes in God await the hour, which will come sooner or later. Now for the moment all my affairs are going badly, so it would seem, and that has been so for a not so inconsiderable period of time, and it may stay that way for a future of longer or shorter duration, but it may be that after everything has seemed to go wrong, it may then all go better. I’m not counting on it, perhaps it won’t happen, but supposing there were to come some change for the better, I would count that as so much gained; I’d be pleased about it, I’d say, well then, there you are, there was something, after all.
   But you’ll say, though, you’re an execrable creature since you have impossible ideas on religion and childish scruples of conscience. If I have any that are impossible or childish, may I be freed from them; I’d like nothing better. But here’s where I am on this subject, more or less. You’ll find in Souvestre’s Le philosophe sous les toits how a man of the people, a simple workman, very wretched, if you will, imagined his mother country, ‘Perhaps you have never thought about what your mother country is, he continued, putting a hand on my shoulder; it’s everything that surrounds you, everything that raised and nourished you, everything you have loved. This countryside that you see, these houses, these trees, these young girls, laughing as they pass by over there, that’s your mother country! The laws that protect you, the bread that is the reward of your labour, the words that you exchange, the joy and sadness that come to you from the men and the things among which you live, that’s your mother country! The little room where you once used to see your mother, the memories she left you, the earth in which she rests, that’s your mother country! You see it, you breathe it everywhere! Just think, your rights and your duties, your attachments and your needs, your memories and your gratitude, put all that together under a single name, and that name will be your mother country.’ Now likewise, everything in men and in their works that is truly good, and beautiful with an inner moral, spiritual and sublime beauty, I think that that comes from God, and that everything that is bad and wicked in the works of men and in men, that’s not from God, and God doesn’t find it good, either. But without intending it, I’m always inclined to believe that the best way of knowing God is to love a great deal. Love that friend, that person, that thing, whatever you like, you’ll be on the right path to knowing more thoroughly, afterwards; that’s what I say to myself. But you must love with a high, serious intimate sympathy, with a will, with intelligence, and you must always seek to know more thoroughly, better, and more. That leads to God, that leads to unshakeable faith. Someone, to give an example, will love Rembrandt, but seriously, that man will know there is a God, he’ll believe firmly in Him. Someone will make a deep study of the history of the French Revolution — he will not be an unbeliever, he will see that in great things, too, there is a sovereign power that manifests itself. Someone will have attended, for a time only, the free course at the great university of poverty, and will have paid attention to the things he sees with his eyes and hears with his ears, and will have thought about it; he too, will come to believe, and will perhaps learn more about it than he could say. Try to understand the last word of what the great artists, the serious masters, say in their masterpieces; there will be God in it. Someone has written or said it in a book, someone in a painting. And quite simply read the Bible, and the Gospels, because that will give you something to think about, and a great deal to think about and everything to think about, well then, think about this great deal, think about this everything, it raises your thinking above the ordinary level, despite yourself. Since we know how to read, let’s read, then! Now, afterwards, we may well at times be a little absent-minded, a little dreamy; there are those who become a little too absent-minded, a little too dreamy; that happens to me, perhaps, but it’s my own fault. And after all, who knows, wasn’t there some cause; it was for this or that reason that I was absorbed, preoccupied, anxious, but you get over that. The dreamer sometimes falls into a pit, but they say that afterwards he comes up out of it again.
   And the absent-minded man, at times he too has his presence of mind, as if in compensation. He’s sometimes a character who has his raison d’être for one reason or another which one doesn’t always see right away, or which one forgets through being absent-minded, mostly unintentionally. One who has been rolling along for ages as if tossed on a stormy sea arrives at his destination at last; one who has seemed good for nothing and incapable of filling any position, any role, finds one in the end, and, active and capable of action, shows himself entirely different from what he had seemed at first sight. I’m writing you somewhat at random whatever comes into my pen; I would be very happy if you could somehow see in me something other than some sort of idler. Because there are idlers and idlers, who form a contrast. There’s the one who’s an idler through laziness and weakness of character, through the baseness of his nature; you may, if you think fit, take me for such a one. Then there’s the other idler, the idler truly despite himself, who is gnawed inwardly by a great desire for action, who does nothing because he finds it impossible to do anything since he’s imprisoned in something, so to speak, because he doesn’t have what he would need to be productive, because the inevitability of circumstances is reducing him to this point. Such a person doesn’t always know himself what he could do, but he feels by instinct, I’m good for something, even so! I feel I have a raison d’être! I know that I could be a quite different man! For what then could I be of use, for what could I serve! There’s something within me, so what is it! That’s an entirely different idler; you may, if you think fit, take me for such a one. In the springtime a bird in a cage29 knows very well that there’s something he’d be good for; he feels very clearly that there’s something to be done but he can’t do it; what it is he can’t clearly remember, and he has vague ideas and says to himself, ‘the others are building their nests and making their little ones and raising the brood’, and he bangs his head against the bars of his cage. And then the cage stays there and the bird is mad with suffering. ‘Look, there’s an idler’, says another passing bird — that fellow’s a sort of man of leisure. And yet the prisoner lives and doesn’t die; nothing of what’s going on within shows outside, he’s in good health, he’s rather cheerful in the sunshine. But then comes the season of migration. A bout of melancholy — but, say the children who look after him, he’s got everything that he needs in his cage, after all — but he looks at the sky outside, heavy with storm clouds, and within himself feels a rebellion against fate. I’m in a cage, I’m in a cage, and so I lack for nothing, you fools! Me, I have everything I need!30 Ah, for pity’s sake, freedom, to be a bird like other birds!
   An idle man like that resembles an idle bird like that. And it’s often impossible for men to do anything, prisoners in I don’t know what kind of horrible, horrible, very horrible cage. There is also, I know, release, belated release. A reputation ruined rightly or wrongly, poverty, inevitability of circumstances, misfortune; that creates prisoners. You may not always be able to say what it is that confines, that immures, that seems to bury, and yet you feel I know not what bars, I know not what gates — walls. Is all that imaginary, a fantasy? I don’t think so; and then you ask yourself, Dear God, is this for long, is this for ever, is this for eternity? You know, what makes the prison disappear is every deep, serious attachment. To be friends, to be brothers, to love; that opens the prison through sovereign power, through a most powerful spell. But he who doesn’t have that remains in death. But where sympathy springs up again, life springs up again. And the prison is sometimes called Prejudice, misunderstanding, fatal ignorance of this or that, mistrust, false shame. But to speak of something else, if I’ve come down in the world, you, on the other hand, have gone up. And while I may have lost friendships, you have won them. That’s what I’m happy about, I say it in truth, and that will always make me glad. If you were not very serious and not very profound, I might fear that it won’t last, but since I think you are very serious and very profound, I’m inclined to believe that it will last.
   But if it became possible for you to see in me something other than an idler of the bad kind, I would be very pleased about that. And if I could ever do something for you, be useful to you in some way, know that I am at your service. Since I’ve accepted what you gave me, you could equally ask me for something if I could be of service to you in some way or another; it would make me happy and I would consider it a sign of trust. We’re quite distant from one another, and in certain respects we may have different ways of seeing, but nevertheless, sometime or some day one of us might be able to be of use to the other. For today, I shake your hand, thanking you again for the kindness you’ve shown me. Now if you’d like to write to me one of these days, my address is care of C. Decrucq, rue du Pavillon 8, Cuesmes, near Mons, and know that by writing you’ll do me good. Yours truly, Vincent Cuesmes, 20 August 1880 Dear Theo, If I’m not mistaken, you should still have Millet’s ‘The labours of the fields’. Would you be so kind as to lend them to me for a short while, and to send them to me by post? You should know that I’m sketching large drawings after Millet, and that I’ve done The four times of the day, as well as The sower. Well, if you saw them perhaps you wouldn’t be too unhappy with them. Now, if you’d like to send me The labours of the fields, perhaps you could also add some other sheets by or after Millet, J. Breton, Feyen-Perrin, &c. Don’t buy any specially, but lend me what you may have. Send me what you can, and don’t have any fears on my account. If only I can go on working, I’ll recover somehow. But you’d be a great help to me by doing this. If you pay a visit to Holland sooner or later, I hope you won’t pass by without coming to see the scratches. I’m writing to you while drawing and I’m in a hurry to get back to it, so good-night, and send the sheets as soon as possible, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent c/o Charles Decrucq rue du Pavillon 3 Cuesmes. The Millets that I’ve done are The four times of the day, the format more or less that of a sheet from the Bargue drawing course.

   You’ll understand well enough yourself what I need to make it unnecessary for me to tell you, but I’ll tell you nevertheless, so that you can know my thinking. They’re mainly figure studies, such as Millet’s The diggers, or the lithograph after his Winnower. And figures by Brion or Frère or Feyen-Perrin or Jules Breton. I believe you could find just what I need at the Alliance des Arts, where they have the lithographs by Contemporary Artists &c., which are sold there extremely cheaply. A sheet that I’d be immensely glad to have is Daubigny’s large etching after Ruisdael, The bush, which is on sale at the print-shop in the Louvre. I’ve done a scratch of miners, male and female thrutchersb, going to the pit in the morning, in the snow, on a path beside a thorn-hedge: passing shadows, dimly visible in the dusk. In the background, the large mine buildings and the slag heap are becoming indistinct against the sky. I’m sending you the croquis so that you can picture it for yourself. But I feel the need to study figure drawing from masters like Millet, Breton and10 Brion or Boughton, or someone else. What do you think of the croquis? Does the idea seem good to you? In the photographs after J. Breton by Bingham there is, if I remember rightly, one of women gleaners. Dark silhouettes against a sky in which the sun is setting, red. There you are, it’s things like that I need to have before my eyes. It’s because I think you’d prefer to see me doing something good than doing nothing at all that I’m writing to you on this subject, and perhaps it would be a reason why good understanding and friendship might be re-established between the two of us, and we might perhaps be useful to one another. I’d very much like to execute the drawing in question better than I have done. In the one that I’ve done, as it stands, the figures might be about 10 centimetres high. The pendant is of the miners’ return, but it’s less successful as it stands. It’s very difficult, as it involves an effect of brown silhouettes encircled by light against a streaky sunset sky.  Send The labours of the fields by return of post if you can and if you will. 
    
   I’ve dropped a line to Mr Tersteeg to ask him if perhaps there would be some way for me to have Bargue’s Exercices au fusain for a while, i.e. the studies of the nude model you’re familiar with. I don’t know if he’ll do it or not, that’s to say send me them, but supposing he didn’t, couldn’t you influence him a little in my favour? Because these Exercices au fusain would be eminently useful to me. But perhaps he’ll do me the favour of sending me at least some sheets, if not the whole course. Cuesmes, 7 Sept. 1880 Dear Theo, As for the sheets, etchings &c. that you sent me some time ago, I received them safely and I thank you very much for them. You did me a great service by sending them. I’ll tell you, then, that I’ve sketched the 10 sheets of Millet’s Labours of the fields1 (in approximately the dimensions of a sheet of the Bargue Cours de dessin)2 and that I’ve completely finished one of them, namely The woodcutter. I would be further on with them if it weren’t for the fact that I first wanted to do Bargue’s Exercices au fusain, which Mr Tersteeg has been so kind as to lend me, and now I’ve finished the 60 sheets. Furthermore, I’ve drawn The evening prayer5 after the etching that you sent. I’d very much like to be able to show you them, to have your opinion on all of it, as well as on some other drawings, such as a large sepia after T. Rousseau, Oven in Les Landes. I’d done it twice before, small, in watercolours, before succeeding with it. I would, as I’ve already told you, really like to do Ruisdael’s The bush, too. You know that these two landscapes are in the same style and sentiment. For quite a while I’ve been scribbling down drawings without making much progress, but recently it’s been going better, it seems to me, and I’m confident that it will go better still. Especially in view of the fact that Mr Tersteeg and you, too, have come to my aid with good models; because I believe I do much better for the time being by first copying some good things than by working without that foundation.  However, I couldn’t help sketching, in fairly large dimensions, the drawing of the miners going to the pit, of which I sent you the croquis, changing the arrangement of the figures slightly.
    I really hope that after copying Bargue’s two other series as well9 I’ll be able to draw a more or less reasonable miner or female thrutcher, when one of these days it will be possible for me to have a model with some character, and as far as that’s concerned, there are some here. I find the lithograph after Bosboom, Interior of a cowshed, very beautiful. You well understood my thinking when you added Hébert’s Malaria11 to our collection. If you still own the book with the etchings after Michel, lend it to me too sometime, but it’s not urgent; I have plenty to work on for the time being, but I’ll be very eager to see those landscapes again, because now I see things with a different eye from the time when I wasn’t yet drawing. I hope you won’t be too unhappy with the drawings after Millet when you see them; these little wood engravings13 are wonderful. As I’ll already have 20 sheets after Millet, all told, you can well understand that if you could obtain some more for me I’d be very keen to do them, as I’m trying to study this master seriously. I’m well aware that the large etching of the diggers15 is rare, but keep an eye open for it nevertheless, and tell me at what price one could still get it. One of these days I’ll earn16 a farthing or two with some scratch of a miner, and I’d be very keen to have that sheet, as well as The bush, as soon as I could buy it, even though it might be a bit expensive. 
   The other day I bought 2 volumes of the Musée Universel for 2. francs, in which there are a fair number of interesting wood engravings, including 3 Millets. I couldn’t tell you how much Mr Tersteeg has pleased me by agreeing to let me have Bargue’s Exercices au fusain and Cours de dessin. I’ve worked on the first ones for a fortnight or thereabouts, from very early in the morning until evening, and day by day I’ve believed I could feel that it was making me stronger. But not with less, rather with more eagerness, I’m now doing The labours of the fields. It’s The sheep-shearers19 that are on the go now. So accept my sincere thanks for sending them, and be sure that anything you might be able to find by that artist couldn’t be more useful to me. As for The sower, I’ve drawn it 5 times now, twice small, 3 times large, and yet I’ll go back to it again, that figure haunts me so. When you write to me, sooner or later (which by way of distraction would give me great pleasure), could you give me some information about A. Legros’ etchings? If my memory serves me right, I once saw about a dozen of them in England that were very fine. For today, I’ll end this letter by thanking you again and shaking your hand. Vincent Also accept my congratulations on the occasion of 10 September. Address C. Decrucq. 3 rue du Pavillon Cuesmes (near Mons) 
   Here are the Millets that I have: The Sower. Evening prayer Reapers binding sheaves23 Woodcutter and his wife in the forest24 Fields in winter. Young peasant26 Labours of the fields, 10 sheets Four times of the day, 4 sheets27 Don’t you still have an old woodcutter alone in the woods in your collection of wood engravings? Cuesmes, 24 Sept. 1880 Dear Theo, Your letter did me good; I thank you for writing to me like that. Actually, the roll containing a new collection of etchings and various sheets has just arrived. First and foremost, the masterly etching, The bush, by Daubigny/Ruisdael. That’s it! I plan to do two drawings, either in sepia or something else, one of them after this etching — the other after T. Rousseau’s The oven in Les Landes. This latter sepia is already done — it’s true — but if you compare it with Daubigny’s etching, you’ll understand that it becomes weak, even though the sepia drawing considered on its own may very well have a certain tone and sentiment. I have to go back to it and work on it again. I’m still working on Bargue’s Cours de dessin, and plan to finish it before undertaking anything else, since day by day it exercises and strengthens both my hand and my mind, and I wouldn’t be able to feel sufficiently indebted to Mr Tersteeg for having so generously lent them to me. These models are excellent. In the meantime I’m busy reading a book on anatomy and another on perspective, which Mr Tersteeg also sent me. This study is thorny, and sometimes these books are as irritating as could be, but nevertheless I believe that I’m doing the right thing by studying them. You can see, then, that I’m working like mad, but for the moment it isn’t giving very heartening results. But I have hopes that these thorns will bear white flowers in their time, and that this apparently sterile struggle is nothing other than a labour of giving birth. First pain, then joy afterwards. You tell me about Lessore. I believe I can recall some very elegant watercolour landscapes which could be by him, in a pale tone, with brushwork that’s apparently easy and light but at the same time accurate and refined, with an effect (let it be said with no bad intention, on the contrary, with a good one) that’s a little decorative. So I could be said to know something about his work, and you’d be telling me about somebody who isn’t altogether unfamiliar to me. I like the portrait of Victor Hugo. It’s very conscientiously done, with the clear intention of bearing witness to the truth without searching for effect. By virtue of that, though, it does have an effect. I studied some of Hugo’s works a little this past winter. Namely Le dernier jour d’un condamné5 and a very beautiful book on Shakespeare. I took up the study of this writer a long time ago now. It’s as beautiful as Rembrandt. Shakespeare is to Charles Dickens or to V. Hugo what Ruisdael is to Daubigny, and Rembrandt to Millet.  What you say in your letter on the subject of Barbizon7 is very true and I’ll tell you one or two things that will prove to you that that’s my own way of seeing as well. I haven’t seen Barbizon, but although I haven’t seen it, last winter I saw Courrières. I made a trip on foot mainly in the Pas de Calais, not the Channel but the department. Or province. I made that trip hoping perhaps to find work there (any sort, if possible; I would have accepted anything), but actually without any real plan, I couldn’t precisely say why. But I’d said to myself, You must see Courrières. I had only 10 francs in my pocket, and having started out by taking the train I’d soon exhausted those resources, and having stayed on the road for a week, I trudged rather painfully. Nevertheless, I saw Courrières and the outside of Mr Jules Breton’s studio. The outside of this studio disappointed me a little, seeing that it’s a brand-new studio and newly built in brick, of a Methodist regularity, of an aspect as inhospitable and chilly and ascetic as C.M.’s Jovinda, which, between ourselves, I don’t much like either for this same reason. If I’d been able to see the inside I would have thought no more about the outside, I’m inclined to believe, and I’m sure of it even, but there you are, I wasn’t able to get a look at the inside.
   Because I didn’t dare to introduce myself, so as to go in. I looked elsewhere in Courrières for some trace of Jules Breton or of some other artist; all I found was his picture at a photographer’s shop12 and then, in the old church, in a dark corner, a copy of Titian’s Entombment, which in the darkness seemed to me to be very beautiful and of a masterly tone. Was it by him? I don’t know, being unable to make out any signature. But of a living artist, not a trace, there was only a café, the so-called Café des Beaux-Arts, also in inhospitable and chilly and mortifying new brick, which café was decorated with some sort of frescoes or mural paintings depicting episodes from the life of the illustrious knight, Don Quixote. These frescoes, let it be said in confidence, seemed to me then rather poor consolation and rather mediocre. I don’t know who they were by. But at any rate I saw the Courrières countryside then, the haystacks, the brown farmland or the almost coffee-coloured marly soil, with whitish spots where the marl appears, which is something rather extraordinary for those of us who are used to blackish soil. And the French sky seemed to me far more clear and limpid than the smoky and misty Borinage sky. Furthermore, there were the farmhouses and sheds that had still preserved their mossy thatched roofs, God be praised and thanked for it; I also saw hosts of crows, famous from the paintings of Daubigny and Millet. Not to mention first of all, as one should, the typical and picturesque figures of the workmen: different diggers, woodcutters, a farm-hand driving his team, and the occasional outline of a woman in a white bonnet. Even there, at Courrières, there was a coal-mine or pit;17 I saw the day-shift coming up at dusk, but there were no women workers in men’s clothing, as in the Borinage, only miners looking weary and miserable, blackened by coal-dust, wearing pit-rags and one of them an old army greatcoat. Although this stage was almost unbearable to me, and I returned from it worn out, with bruised feet and in a rather melancholy state, I don’t regret it, because I saw interesting things and you learn to see with a quite different eye, there among the raw ordeals of poverty itself. I earned a few crusts of bread en route18 here and there in exchange for some drawings that I had in my suitcase. But when my ten francs were gone, I had to bivouac out in the open for the last 3 nights, once in an abandoned carriage, all white with frost in the morning, a rather poor shelter, once in a wood-pile and once, and it was a little better, in a haystack that had been broached, where I managed to make a slightly more comfortable nest, only a fine rain didn’t exactly add to my well-being. Well, and notwithstanding, it was in this extreme poverty that I felt my energy return and that I said to myself, in any event I’ll recover from it, I’ll pick up my pencil that I put down in my great discouragement and I’ll get back to drawing, and from then on, it seems to me, everything has changed for me, and now I’m on my way and my pencil has become somewhat obedient and seems to become more so day by day. It was poverty, too long and too severe, that had discouraged me to the point where I could no longer do anything.
   Another thing that I saw during that excursion was the weavers’ villages. The miners and the weavers are something of a race apart from other workmen and tradesmen, and I have a great fellow-feeling for them and would count myself happy if I could draw them one day, so that these types, as yet unpublished or almost unpublished, could be brought to notice. The man from the bottom of the abyss, ‘de profundis’, that’s the miner; the other one, with a dreamy, almost pensive, almost a sleep-walker’s air, is the weaver. And now it’s roughly 2 years that I’ve been living with them, and to some extent I’ve learned to know their original character, mainly that of the miners at least. And more and more I find something touching and even heart-rending in these poor and obscure workers, the lowest of all, so to speak, and the most looked down upon, which one usually pictures through the effect of a perhaps vivid but very false and unjust imagination as a race of criminals and brigands. There are criminals, drunkards, brigands here as elsewhere, but that’s not at all the true type. In your letter you spoke to me vaguely about coming to Paris or the surrounding area. Sooner or later, when it would be possible and when I felt like it. Of course, it would be my great and ardent desire to come either to Paris or to Barbizon or somewhere else. But how could I do it, because I don’t earn a sou, and although I work hard it’ll take more time yet to reach the level of being able to think of such a thing as coming to Paris. Because in truth, to be able to work as one should, it would take at least about a hundred francs a month; you can live on less, but then you’re hard up, far too much so in fact. Poverty prevents good minds succeeding; that’s Palissy’s20 old proverb, in which there’s truth, and which is entirely true if one understands its real purpose and import. For the moment I can’t see how the thing would be practicable, and it’s better that I stay here, working as I can and will be able to, and after all, it’s cheaper to live here. However, I’d be unable to continue much longer in the little room where I am now. It’s tiny as it is, and there are two beds, the children’s and mine. And now that I’m doing the Bargues, quite big sheets, I couldn’t tell you what a nuisance it is to me. I don’t want to bother the people in their household arrangements; and also they’ve told me that as far as the other room in the house goes, there was no way for me to have it, even if I paid more, because the wife needs it to do her washing, which in a miner’s house has to be done almost every day. So I would like simply to take a little workman’s house; that costs 9 francs a month on average. I couldn’t tell you how much (despite the fact that every day new difficulties present themselves and will continue to present themselves), I couldn’t tell you how happy I feel to have taken up drawing again. It had already been on my mind for a long time, but I always saw the thing as impossible and beyond my reach. But now, while feeling both my weakness and my painful dependence in respect of many things, I’ve recovered my peace of mind, and my energy is coming back day by day.
   Now, about coming to Paris. If we found an opportunity to get in touch with some decent, valiant artist, it would be extremely advantageous for me, but, to go there just like that, it would only be a repetition on a large scale of my trip to Courrières, where I’d hoped perhaps to meet some living being of the Artist species, but where I didn’t find one. For me it’s a matter of learning to draw well, to be master either of my pencil or my charcoal or my brush; once that’s achieved I’ll do good things almost no matter where, and the Borinage is every bit as picturesque as old Venice, as Arabia, as Brittany, Normandy, Picardy or Brie. If I’m doing the wrong thing, the fault is mine. But one can very certainly find more easily at Barbizon than elsewhere, if one perhaps were to have this happy encounter, the opportunity to fall in with some more advanced artist who would be for me truly a Heaven-sent angel, let it be said seriously and without any exaggeration. So if, sometime, you were to see means and opportunity, think of me; while waiting I’ll stay quietly in some little workman’s house, where I’ll work as best I can. You also speak to me of Meryon; what you say about him is very true, I am indeed slightly acquainted with his etchings. Would you like to see something curious — put one of his so precise and so powerful scratches beside any print by Viollet-le-Duc22 or by anyone at all who does architecture. Then you’ll see Meryon in full light because of the other etching, which will serve, if I may be so free, as a foil or contrast. So what do you see, then? This. Meryon, even when he’s drawing bricks, granite, the iron bars or the parapet of a bridge, puts something of the human soul, shaken by I know not what heartache, into his etching. I’ve seen drawings of Gothic architecture by V. Hugo. Well, without having Meryon’s powerful and masterly execution, there was something of the same sentiment. What is this sentiment? It has some kinship with that which Albrecht Dürer expressed in his Melancholy, which in our times James Tissot and M. Maris also have (however different these two may be one from the other). Some profound critic rightly said of James Tissot ‘He’s a soul in need’. But in any event, there’s something of the human soul there; it’s for that reason that that is great, immense, infinite, and put Viollet-le-Duc beside it, it’s stone, and the other (namely Meryon), that’s Spirit. Meryon must have had such a power to love that now, like Dickens’s Sydney Carton, he loves the very stones of certain places. But it’s also found more and better, in a nobler, worthier and, if I may be allowed to say so, more Evangelical tone — the precious pearl, the human soul revealed — in Millet, in Jules Breton, in Jozef Israëls. But to return to Meryon, he has also, it seems to me, some distant kinship with Jongkind and perhaps Seymour Haden, because at certain moments these two artists were very strong. Wait, perhaps you’ll still see that I too am a worker, although I don’t know in advance what will be possible for me; nevertheless, I do hope to make some scratch yet in which there might be something human. But first I have to draw the Bargues and do other things that are rather tricky. The way is strait and the gate is strait and there are few that find it. Thanking you for your kindness, chiefly for The bush, I shake your hand. Vincent I’ve taken all your collection now, but you’ll have it back later, and in addition, for your collection of wood engravings, which I hope you’re continuing, I have some very good things in the 2 volumes of the Musée Universel, which I intend for you. Brussels, 15 Oct. 1880 Dear Theo, As you see, I’m writing to you from Brussels. Because I thought it was the right thing to do to move somewhere else for the moment. And that for more than one reason. First, it was from urgent necessity, as the little study where I was staying and which you were able to see last year2 was so cramped and the light there was so bad that it was very inconvenient for drawing. It’s true that if I could have had another room in the house I could have stayed, but the people of the house needed it, this other room, to do their household chores and washing, and even if I paid a little more there was no way of having it. It’s also true that for the Exercices au fusain and Les modèles d’après la bosse from Bargue, I did draw them there all the same, either in the little study or outside in the garden, but now that I’ve come to the portraits after Holbein &c. in the 3rd part of the Cours de dessin, it wouldn’t do any more. That means that I’ve moved, and now to remedy things somewhat radically, here’s my plan, which I’ve begun to carry out. I’ve been to see Mr Schmidt, here in Brussels, and have spoken to him about the matter. That’s to say, I’ve asked him if through his good offices there might not be a way for me to make contact and connection with some artist, so that I could continue to learn in some serious studio. Because I feel that it’s absolutely necessary to have good things before one’s eyes, and also to see artists at work. Because that makes me feel more strongly what I lack, and at the same time I’m learning the way to remedy it. For a long time now I haven’t seen enough paintings or drawings &c., and the mere sight of a few good things here in Brussels has raised my morale, so to speak, and has further increased the desire that I have to learn to do something with my own hands. If Mr Schmidt would have the kindness to speak seriously to someone or other I have no doubt that things could work out rather effectively. He received me warmly, but nevertheless, if you would say a word or two in my favour to recommend the matter to him, that would have more effect on him than I could produce, because it’s very natural that he perhaps regards me with some mistrust, due to the fact that I was previously with the firm of G&Cie., then moved, and am now returning again to matters of art.
   So if you would write him a short line by return of post you’d be doing me a great service and it would save time. I went straight back to my work here, that’s to say the 3rd part of the Bargues, and have a much more suitable room than the little study, in a small lodging-house in blvd du Midi. My father wrote to me that for the time being I could expect to receive 60 francs a month through him. There are several young people who are beginning the study of drawing and are in the same situation and aren’t rich, either. But the thing that gives strength in such circumstances is that one isn’t always alone, but is in contact and connected with others who are in the same situation. And so that’s what my great desire is — that through Mr Schmidt’s good offices some door might be opened for me to meet some of the young artists here. So would you do the thing in question to that effect, i.e. write a short line to Mr S.? I’ve done a pen drawing after Millet’s woodcutter (the wood engraving that you sent me). I believe that drawing with the pen is a good preparation if later you might wish to learn etching. You can do a great deal with the pen, also, to enhance pencil drawings, but you don’t succeed the first time. As for the drawing after Ruisdael’s Bush, I’d above all like to work at it in pen, and am preparing myself for that by making trial attempts with other drawings. Among others, I’ve done one of the head of Dante, which is somewhat like an etching. But it’s not as easy as it seems. At our meeting Mr Schmidt spoke to me about entering L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts8 here, but I told him frankly that it seemed to me that it was far more preferable in my particular case to work at some artist’s. Especially since I’ve already done two series of Bargues and have the 3rd in hand, which I could perhaps complete with Allongé’s charcoals. I don’t, however, dismiss the idea of L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts, inasmuch as, for example, I could go there in the evening as long as I’m here, if it’s free or not expensive.
   But my goal must, for the moment at least, remain to learn as quickly as possible to do presentable and saleable drawings, so that I’ll begin to earn an income directly through my work. Because such indeed is the necessity that is imposed upon me. If you write to me, please address the letter care of Mr Schmidt, because I don’t know if I’ll stay for a long or short time in my present lodgings. I believe that you’ll approve of what I’m telling you, because in order to make progress it’s necessary to continue with a certain amount of energy. Once I am master of my pencil or of watercolour or of etching, I can return to the region of the miners or weavers, to do things better from life than thus far. But first I must acquire a modicum of skill. Mr Schmidt asked at length for news of you and pays you compliments; he’s in the process of moving to another shop in rue du Marché aux Herbes, opposite passage d’Hubert, and this shop is certainly very fine, as far as I’ve been able to see it so far. Well then, I conclude for the moment, hoping that you’ll be in agreement with what I’ve told you. I believe that a lodging and perhaps also a diet slightly better than that of the Borinage will also help to build me up a bit. Because I’ve certainly experienced some sufferings in the Belgian ‘black country’, and my health hasn’t been too good lately. But provided that I succeed one day in being able actually to draw what I wish to express, I’ll forget all that and will remember only the good aspect of things, which also exists if one is willing to observe it. But I must nevertheless try to build myself up a little, because I need all my energy. Shaking your hand Vincent  Brussels, 1 Nov. 72 blvd du Midi My dear Theo, I want to tell you a few things in reply to your letter. First of all, that I went to see Mr Roelofs the day after I received your letter, and he told me that his opinion was that from now on I should concentrate on drawing from nature, i.e. whether plaster or model, but not without guidance from someone who understands it well. And he, and others too, seriously advised me definitely to go and work at a drawing academy, at least for a while, here or in Antwerp or anywhere I could, so I think I should in fact do something about getting admitted to that drawing academy, although I don’t particularly like the idea. Tuition is free here in Brussels, I hear that in Amsterdam, for example, it costs 100 guilders a year, and one can work in an adequately heated and lighted room, which is worth thinking about, especially for the winter. I’m making headway with the examples of Bargue, and things are progressing. Moreover, I’ve recently drawn something that was a lot of work but I’m glad to have done it. Made, in fact, a pen drawing of a skeleton, rather large at that, on 5 sheets of Ingres paper. 

1 
sheet 
the head, skeleton and muscles


1
,,
torso, skeleton


1
,,
hand 
 from the front, skeleton and muscles


1
,,
,,
from the back, 



,,
,,





1
,,
pelvis and legs, skeleton.


 I was prompted to do it by a manual written by Zahn, Esquisses anatomiques à l’usage des artistes. And it includes a number of other 
   illustrations which seem to me very effective and clear. Of the hand, foot &c. &c. And what I’m now going to do is complete the drawing of the muscles, i.e. that of the torso and legs, which will form the whole of the human body with what’s already made. Then there’s still the body seen from the back and from the side. So you see that I’m pushing ahead with a vengeance, those things aren’t so very easy, and require time and moreover quite a bit of patience. To be admitted to the drawing academy one must have permission from the mayor and be registered. I’m waiting for an answer to my request. I know, of course, that no matter how frugally, how poorly even, one lives, it will turn out to be more expensive in Brussels than in Cuesmes, for instance, but I shan’t succeed without any guidance, and I think it possible — if I only work hard, which I certainly do — that either Uncle Cent or Uncle Cor will do something, if not as a concession to me at least as a concession to Pa. It’s my plan to get hold of the anatomical illustrations of a horse, cow and sheep, for example, from the veterinary school, and to draw them in the same way as the anatomy of a person. There are laws of proportion, of light and shadow, of perspective, that one must know in order to be able to draw anything at all. If one lacks that knowledge, it will always remain a fruitless struggle and one will never give birth to anything. That’s why I believe I’m steering a straight course by taking matters in hand in this way, and want to try and acquire a wealth of anatomy here this winter, it won’t do to wait longer and would ultimately prove to be more expensive because it would be a waste of time.
   I believe that this will also be your point of view. Drawing is a hard and difficult struggle. If I should be able to find some steady work here, all the better, but I don’t dare count on it yet, because I must first learn a great many things. Also went to see Mr Van Rappard, who now lives at rue Traversière 64, and have spoken to him. He has a fine appearance, I’ve not seen anything of his work other than a couple of small pen drawings of landscapes. But he lives rather sumptuously7 and, for financial reasons, I don’t know whether he’s the person with whom, for instance, I could live and work. But in any case I’ll go and see him again. But the impression I got of him was that there appears to be seriousness in him. In Cuesmes, old boy, I couldn’t have stood it a month longer without falling ill with misery. You mustn’t think that I live in luxury here, for my food consists mainly of dry bread and some potatoes or chestnuts which people sell on the street corners, but I’ll manage very well with a slightly better room and by eating a slightly better meal from time to time in a restaurant if that were possible. But for nearly 2 years I endured one thing and another in the Borinage, that’s no pleasure trip. But it will easily amount to something more than 60 francs and really can’t be otherwise. Drawing materials and examples, for instance, for anatomy, it all costs money, and those are certainly essentials, and only in this way can it pay off later, otherwise I’ll never succeed. I had great pleasure lately in reading an extract from the work by Lavater and Gall. Physiognomie et phrénologie. Namely character as it is expressed in facial characteristics and the shape of the skull. Drew The diggers by Millet9 after a photo by Braun10 that I found at Schmidt’s and which he lent me with that of The evening angelus. I sent both those drawings to Pa so that he could see that I’m doing something. Write to me again soon. Address 72 blvd du Midi. I’m staying in a small boarding-house for 50 francs a month and have my bread and a cup of coffee here, morning, afternoon and evening. That isn’t very cheap but it’s expensive everywhere here.
   The Holbeins from the Modèles d’apres les maitres12 are splendid, I notice that now, drawing them, much more than before. But they aren’t easy, I assure you. That Mr Schmidt was entangled in a money matter which would involve the Van Gogh family and for which he, namely Mr S., would be justly prosecuted, I knew not the slightest thing about all that when I went to see him, and I first learned of it from your letter. So that was rather unfortunate, though Mr Schmidt received me quite cordially all the same. Knowing it now, though, and matters being as they are, it would perhaps be wise not to go there often, without it being necessary deliberately to avoid meeting him. I would have written to you sooner but was too busy with my skeleton. I believe that the longer you think about it the more you’ll see the definite necessity of more artistic surroundings for me, for how is one supposed to learn to draw unless someone shows you? With the best will in the world one cannot succeed without also coming into and remaining in contact with artists who are already further along. Good will is of no avail if there’s absolutely no opportunity for development. As regards mediocre artists, to whose ranks you think I should not want to belong, what shall I say? That depends on what one calls mediocre. I’ll do what I can, but in no way do I despise the mediocre in its simple sense. And one certainly doesn’t rise above that level by despising that which is mediocre, in my opinion one must at least begin by having some respect for the mediocre as well, and by knowing that that, too, already means something and that one doesn’t achieve even that without much effort. Adieu for today, I shake your hand in thought. Write again soon if you can. Vincent My dear fellow, Since for so long, several months in fact, I’ve had no news from you, not even the smallest response to my last letter, perhaps it won’t be an inappropriate moment to ask you for some sign of life.  I really must tell you, although I can appreciate your various activities, &c., that it seems at least a little strange to me and a little inexplicable that you’ve never written, after a single letter that I received on my arrival here. So be it. The question remains, could you not have acted a little differently? Not to write is good, but all the same, to write at the appropriate time isn’t always bad either; in certain cases it’s even a very desirable thing. Because, my very dear, let’s be careful, let’s not spin our thread too fine; you know, it could become too fragile. When thinking of you, I can’t help saying to myself: Why doesn’t he write? If he’s afraid of compromising himself vis à vis those Messrs G&Cie by keeping in touch with me, is his position in regard to the aforementioned gents so unsteady and shaky that he would be obliged to be as chary of himself as that? And if he was afraid of compromising himself in one way or another, why not warn me with a brief line and I wouldn’t write to him, but now I don’t know where I stand. Or is it because he’s afraid that I would ask him for money? But then, if that was the reason for your silence, you could at least have waited to be silent at the time when somebody tried to squeeze something out of you, as the saying goes. However, I don’t wish to lengthen this letter unnecessarily by making you a list of heaps of things that come into my head at times when I think about the reasons you could have had for not writing. I’ve been drawing this winter until now, and have also read a great deal, because indirectly that’s very necessary for me. In general I believe that I’ve made progress, but it ought to be possible to get on faster than that. The main reason I’m writing this is to ask you if you might know of any reason why I shouldn’t go to see Mr Tersteeg and Mauve. I think it would be of benefit to me to go to The Hague for a while. But if I knew for sure that Mr Tersteeg would prefer that I didn’t go there, that could make me change my mind. What do you think? I’ve seen very little of Mr Van Rappard because I believed I had noticed that he didn’t like to be disturbed. As long as I’m not further ahead I should avoid young artists who don’t always think about what they’re doing and saying. And yet I very much wish to find one who, knowing more than me, could help me to do better. So tell me if you saw an insuperable obstacle in the way of my going to The Hague for a while, and if you perhaps knew of another way, if something crops up. I shake your hand, in the expectation that you’ll write to me sooner rather than later. Vincent 72. boulevard du Midi Brussels, January 81. My dear Theo, You will entirely forgive me when you realize that I wrote you my last letter at a bad time. My drawings weren’t going well, and not knowing which way to turn I began to write. I would certainly have done better to have waited for a better moment, but this way you’ll clearly see that without a doubt I myself belong to that class of people of whom I was speaking to you in my letter, namely to that class of persons who don’t always think about what they’re saying and doing. That being so, let’s leave it there. Always be sure of this. In the past few days there’s been a change for the better. I’ve just finished at least a dozen drawings, or rather, pencil and pen croquis, which are, it seems to me, already a little better. They vaguely resemble certain drawings by Lançon1 or certain English wood engravings, but even clumsier, more awkward.a They depict, among others, a delivery man, a miner, man sweeping snow, a walk in the snow, old women, type of old man (‘Ferragus’, from Balzac’s L’histoire des treize)2 &c. I’m sending you 2 small ones, ‘On the road’ and ‘In front of the embers’. I can clearly see that it’s not good yet; it’s beginning to emerge, though. I have a model almost every day, an old delivery man or some labourer or lad whom I have pose. Next Sunday I’ll perhaps have one or two soldiers who’ll come to pose. And so, since I’m no longer in a bad mood now, I have a quite different and better idea of you and of the whole world in general. I’ve also drawn a landscape again, namely a heath, which I hadn’t done for a long time. 
   I like landscape very much, but 10 times more these studies of everyday life, sometimes of terrifying truthfulness, such as Gavarni, Henry Monnier, Daumier, De Lemud, Henri Pille, T. Schuler, E. Morin, G. Doré (in his Londres, for example), A. Lançon, Degroux, Félicien Rops7 &c. &c. have drawn with such mastery. Now without in any way daring to claim to rise as high as them, nevertheless, by continuing to draw these types of workmen &c., I’m confident of succeeding in becoming more or less capable of working in magazine or book illustration. First and foremost, when I’ll be able to pay more for models, and female models too, I’ll make further progress; I feel it and I know it. And I’ll probably also succeed in being able to do portraits. But that depends on working hard; not a day without a line, as Gavarni used to say. So it’s understood that I stay here for the time being, while waiting for you to have something or other to offer me, perhaps. But write to me once in a while. I’m now busy drawing all Bargue’s Exercices au fusain for the 3rd time. You mentioned to me a change in the composition of the staff at the firm of G&Cie, and of another change in your own position. I congratulate you on it, and as for those Messrs G&Cie, I’m inclined to believe that there is occasion to congratulate them, too, on clearing out dead wood. 
   I’ve always thought that Those Gentlemen themselves were moved by a superior and nobler spirit than that of those who have at last just cleared off. Perhaps the position that the latter occupied for so long in the firm, their influence and, since these Messrs G&Cie allowed them to do so, their domination — repelled some other employees, whom these Gentlemen could perhaps have done well to retain, but who, driven to the limit, somehow ended up quitting the service.  Since you spoke to me vaguely about coming to Paris in the past, be sure that I would ask for nothing better than indeed to go there one of these days — if I was fortunate enough to know that I would find work there to earn at least 100 francs a month — be sure also, however, that since I’ve made a start with drawing, it isn’t in order to leave it at that; consequently I would mainly try to continue and to make progress in that direction. Drawing figures and scenes of everyday life requires not only knowledge of drawing as a craft, but in addition, rigorous study of literature, physiognomy &c., which are difficult to acquire.  That’s enough for today; I shake your hand; if you have a spare moment, write to me, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent 72 blvd du Midi I hope to go to see Mr Horta one of these days. 
    
    2/4-81 72 blvd du Midi Bruxelles My dear Theo, In answer to your two good letters and prompted by a visit from Pa, which I’d been looking forward to for some time, I have a few things to tell you. And this, first of all. I heard from Pa that you’ve already been sending me money without my knowing it, and in doing so are effectively helping me to get along. For this accept my heartfelt thanks. I have every confidence that you won’t regret it; in this way I’m learning a handicraft, and although I’ll certainly not grow rich by it, at least I’ll earn the 100 francs a month necessary to support myself once I’m surer of myself as a draughtsman and find steady work. What you told us about the painter Heyerdahl2 has greatly aroused the interest of both Rappard and myself. Because the former will no doubt write to you about it himself, I address this question only because it concerns me personally, to some extent. Your remarks about the Dutch artists, that it’s doubtful whether they’d be able to give clear advice on the difficulties of perspective &c. with which I’m wrestling, I find in a certain sense quite correct and true. At any rate, I whole-heartedly agree with you that someone like Heyerdahl, because he seems to be such a highly cultivated man, would be far preferable to some others who might not have the ability to explain their way of doing things to anyone else, or to give one the guidance and advice that’s so necessary. You speak of Heyerdahl as one who takes great pains to seek ‘proportions for the purpose of design’, that’s precisely what I need. Many good painters have no idea, or almost no idea, what ‘proportions for the purpose of design’ are, or beautiful lines or distinctive compositions, and ideas and poetry. Yet these are important questions which Feyen-Perrin and Ulysse Butin3 and Alphonse Legros, not to mention Breton and Millet and Israëls, take very much to heart and never lose sight of. 
   Many Dutch painters would understand nothing, absolutely nothing, of the beautiful work of Boughton, Marks, Millais, Pinwell, Du Maurier, Herkomer, Walker, to name but a few artists who are true masters as ‘draughtsmen’, over and above their qualities in other directions. Many, I say, shrug their shoulders at such work, just as many — even among the painters here in Belgium, who should know better — do at the work of Degroux. I saw 2 things by Degroux this week that I didn’t know yet, namely a painting, The conscript’s departure, and a drawing in vertical format, The drunkard, two compositions that so much resemble Boughton that I was struck by the resemblance, as of two brothers who had never met each other but were nevertheless kindred spirits. So you see that I share your view of Heyerdahl, that I’ll consider myself fortunate if you can put me in touch with that man later on, that I certainly won’t insist on having my way about going to Holland, not, at least, if I have the prospect of going to Paris later on and can more or less count on it. In the meantime, though, what should I do? What would you think best? I can carry on working at Rappard’s for a week or so, but then he’ll probably be leaving. My bedroom is all too small and the light isn’t good, and the people would object to my shutting out some of the light coming in through the window, I’m not even allowed to hang my etchings on the wall or my drawings. So when Rappard leaves here in May I’ll have to move, and in that case I’d very much like to work in the country for a while, Heist, Kalmthout, Etten, Scheveningen, Katwijk or wherever. Or even, which is closer, Schaarbeek, Haren, Groenendaal. But preferably a place where there’s a chance of coming into contact with other painters, and if possible of living and working together, because that’s cheaper and better. The cost of accommodation, no matter where, is at least 100 francs a month, anything less means suffering deprivation, either bodily or through a lack of indispensable materials and tools. 
   This winter I spent around 100 francs a month, I reckon, although in truth it was scarcely that much. And of that I spent a considerable amount on drawing materials and also bought some clothes. Namely bought two workmen’s suits of coarse black velvet, of the material I think one calls velveteen. They look smart and one looks presentable in them; moreover, they’ll come in handy later on, for I’ll need a great many workman’s clothes later, and even now already, for my models, whom I naturally need like anyone else. Gradually I’ll have to acquire articles of clothing of all kinds, second-hand if necessary, both men’s and women’s clothing, for that purpose. Naturally this doesn’t have to happen all at once, though I’ve already made a start and shall continue. You say, and rightly so, that financial matters have done a lot both to assist and to thwart people in the world. So be it, and the words of Bernard Palissy remain true: ‘Poverty prevents good minds succeeding’. But when I think about it, I nonetheless say, Could it be that in a family like ours, in which 2 Messrs van Gogh are very rich, and that in the art business, C.M. and our uncle at Princenhage, and in which you and I in the present generation have also chosen that line of work, albeit in different spheres, I say, notwithstanding these facts, could it be that I can’t continue to count in one way or another on those 100 francs a month for the time that must necessarily elapse before I obtain regular employment as a draughtsman? 3 years ago I had words with Uncle Cor15 on an entirely different matter, but is that any reason for C.M. to bear me ill will for ever and ever? I much prefer to assume that he never bore me any ill will, and view it as a misunderstanding for which I gladly take the entire blame, rather than bickering about whether and to what extent I’m to blame, because I have no time for such arguments. Now, Uncle Cor so often does things to help other draughtsmen, and would it now be so very unnatural for him to take an active interest in me as well, should the occasion arise? I say these things, however, not so much to obtain financial help from His Hon. but rather because I think it wouldn’t be good if he were to show himself completely unwilling for there to be a vigorous renewal of harmony, at least, between us. His Hon. could help me a great deal in a wholly different way than by giving me money, 
   for example by putting me in touch, if possible, now or later, with people from whom I could learn a great deal. And, if possible, by His Hon.’s mediating to bring about one thing or another during the time that must still elapse before I obtain regular employment — in Paris, for example — at some illustrated magazine or other. I also spoke to Pa in this vein, I don’t know whether it will be of any use, but I noticed that they were talking about how strange and inexplicable it was that I had to struggle so hard even though I belonged to such and such a family. In reply to this I said that I thought that this was a passing thing and would be set to rights later. Nonetheless, it seemed to me advisable to speak to Pa and to you about it, and I wrote to Mr Tersteeg and mentioned it briefly, but His Hon. seems not to have understood my meaning, because he took it to mean that I was planning to live out of C.M.’s pocket and, this being his interpretation, he wrote me a rather discouraging letter and said that I had no right to such a thing. I don’t claim to have the right, but I wish to prevent the matter being talked about sooner or later in the studios, and so, in my opinion, harmony must be restored between me and the family, at least temporarily and in the eyes of the world, in expectation of their changing their minds about me. If they refuse, so be it, but then I can’t prevent it being talked about here and there. If I were to write immediately to C.M., or to go and see His Hon., there would be a chance that he wouldn’t read my letter or would receive me all too brusquely, so I’m speaking about it to Pa and to you, because you’ll probably be able to say a word or two about it in passing, and then he won’t misconstrue my meaning. It isn’t my intention to obtain money from His Hon., as Mr Tersteeg thought, unless it be the case that after talking to me he acquires faith and confidence in my future and starts to see me in an entirely different light. And if he were to be convinced of it, then I’d certainly not spurn his help, that goes without saying, and then he would be able to smooth my way a little in an entirely different way than by giving me money, for instance, in the interval of time between now and going to Paris. I wrote to Mr Tersteeg that it didn’t surprise me in the least that he had interpreted my letter in that way, since you had also spoken at one time of ‘idling’. And just as I now understand from the tone of your letter that you no longer see my difficult position in that dismal light, and experience it as well through 
   your effective assistance, so I hope that Mr Tersteeg, too, will gradually change his opinion. The more so because His Hon. was the first to help me with those Bargues, for which I’ll always be grateful. Now you write about a manikin. There’s no particular hurry, but it would be of great use to me in composing and finding poses, you’re sensible of that. However, I’d rather wait a bit longer and have a better one than have a tool sooner that was far too inadequate. Be sure and keep an eye out, though, for all manner of prints or books about proportion, and find out as much as you can about them, that’s of inestimable value, without it one can’t make a figure drawing quickly. Moreover, it would be very beneficial for me to have a thing or two about the anatomy of the horse and sheep, cow, not with an eye to veterinary medicine but rather with a view to drawing the aforementioned animals. If I’m asking you for all these things like this, it’s because you’ll most likely have an opportunity to find such prints very cheaply, relatively speaking, just as I’ve already found a few myself, and you’d perhaps pay them less heed if I hadn’t said that they’re of such great use to me. If you ever have an opportunity to ask Bargue or Viollet-le-Duc, for example, about those prints about proportion, that’s most probably the best place for such information. I should, of course, find it wonderful to live with you later on, but we haven’t reached that point yet. If C.M. could be persuaded to give me a chance to learn the ropes somewhere on a temporary basis, I’d certainly not scorn it. One can sometimes learn much indirectly even from relatively bad artists, just as, for example, Mauve learned a great deal from Verschuur19 about bringing a stable and a wagon into perspective, and the anatomy of a horse, and yet how Mauve towers above Verschuur. If by any chance you can recommend the painting of Madiol at the Salon, do so, for there’s much that’s beautiful in it, and the man is in a fix and has lots of small children. He’s painting a smithy that will also be good, and he recently made a little old woman that is superb in its drawing and especially colour. But he’s very inconsistent. His chalk drawings are often outstanding.
   This letter is really rather long, but I can’t make it any shorter. If I mention that it would be desirable for at least the general public, but in fact even more so for C.M. and others, to change their minds about me, it’s because people like Roelofs, for example, don’t know what to think of such an untoward position, whether there is something wrong with me or with the other side, but he sees that there is something wrong somewhere anyhow. Such a person is therefore too circumspect and will have nothing to do with me at present, just when it’s most necessary for me to receive advice and help. And such experiences are unpleasant, to say the least, it remains to be seen whether, working on with patient energy, I gradually make progress notwithstanding.d I mean to. Where there is a will there is a way. e  And would I be to blame later on if I were to take revenge? Nonetheless, a draughtsman doesn’t draw for the sake of revenge but for the love of drawing, and that’s more compelling than any other reason. And so it’s likely that later on some things will be set to rights that aren’t quite right yet. I’ve collected a lot of woodcuts this winter. Your Millets have been augmented with various others, and you’ll see that your wealth of woodcuts &c. haven’t had an unproductive stay with me. I now have 24 woodcuts by or after Millet, counting the Labours of the fields. But my own drawing is the main thing, and everything has to work towards that. The cheapest thing, of course, would be for me to spend this summer in Etten, there’s subject matter enough there. If you think this desirable, you can write to Pa about it, I’m willing to conform to what they want as regards clothing or anything else, and I’d most likely run into C.M. there this summer, if he were to go there or to Princenhage. There’s no real objection to it, as far as I know. I’ll always be judged or talked about in differing ways, whether within or outside the family, and one will always hear the most wide-ranging opinions being put forward. 
   And I don’t blame anyone for it, for relatively very few people know why a draughtsman does this or that. Peasants and townsfolk, however, generally impute very great wickedness and evil intentions never dreamt of by one who betakes himself to all manner of places, corners and holes that others prefer not to visit, in order to find picturesque places or figures. A peasant who sees me drawing an old tree-trunk and sees me sitting there in front of it for an hour thinks I’m mad, and naturally laughs at me. A young lady who turns up her nose at a workman in his patched and dusty and sweaty work-clothes can’t understand, of course, why anyone visits the Borinage or Heist and goes down a coal-mine all the way to the maintenages, and she, too, comes to the conclusion that I’m mad. All that, though, doesn’t matter to me in the slightest, of course, if only you and Mr Tersteeg and C.M. and Pa and others I’m concerned with know better and, far from criticizing it, say instead, your line of work involves that, and we understand why it is so. So that I repeat, in the circumstances there’s actually no particular reason why I shouldn’t be able to go to Etten, for example, or to The Hague, if it should work out that way, even if little gentlemen and ladies chop logic on the subject. So, since Pa said to me during his visit, do write to Theo and arrange with him what would be best and least expensive, be so good as to let me know your views on this matter before long. Heist (near Blankenberge, thus on the sea) or Kalmthout are very picturesque, there’s subject matter in Etten as well, here too if necessary, although I’d move to Schaarbeek all the same. Scheveningen or Katwijk would of course be possible if C.M. were to change his opinion of me, and then I could profit directly or indirectly from the artists in Holland. As far as expenses go, I reckon them to be at least around 100 francs a month, less isn’t possible, ‘thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn’. And so I’ll wait until you write more concerning one thing and another, and will work at Rappard’s in the meantime. Rappard has really painted some spirited studies, including a few from the models at the academy which are vigorously conceived. A bit more passion or emotion would do him no harm, a little more self-confidence and a little more daring. Someone once said to me, We must make an effort like the lost, like the desperate. But he isn’t doing it yet. I find his landscape drawings in pen28 very witty and pleasing, in those too, though, gradually a bit more passion please! And now I take my leave with a handshake in thought, and remain Ever yours, Vincent I’m sending you three scratches that are still awkward, but from which I hope you’ll nonetheless see that there’s gradual improvement. You must remember that I haven’t been drawing for long, even if I did sometimes make little sketches as a boy. And also that this winter the most important thing for me was to make strict anatomical studies and not my own compositions. 12/4-81 My dear Theo, Having heard from Pa that there’s a chance you’ll be coming to Etten this Sunday, and Pa having written to me that it would be good if I were there as well, I set out for there today. So I hope to meet you soon, which I look forward to with great eagerness, also because I sketched two drawings at Rappard’s, ‘The lamp-bearers’ and ‘The bearers of the burden’, the further execution of which I wanted to discuss with you. To finish them I must, one way or another, have the necessary models, and then I’m confident that something good will come of them, namely a couple of compositions that I can show to Smeeton Tilly3 or the people from L’Illustration or suchlike. So I’m leaving today and am telling you this lest you should perhaps look for me in Brussels. In Etten I’d like to make a few sketches on the heath, which is why I’m going a couple of days earlier. So I hope we see each other soon, and shake your hand in thought. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, My sincere congratulations on your birthday. I think of your visit time and again, I’m glad we spoke to each other again in this way, and hope it turns out that you’ll come again in the summer. I’ve been here for a few days2 and it’s beautiful outdoors, but the weather doesn’t yet permit of drawing outdoors every day. Meanwhile I’ve started on the Millets, The sower is finished and the 4 times of the day sketched. And now still to come are The labours of the field. As you know, there was an exhibition of watercolours in Brussels and it was quite interesting. There were 4 or 5 Mauves, woodcutters, 1 J. Maris, dunes, just like a painting by Ruisdael or Van de Velde. Then J.H. Weissenbruch, superb, 5 large drawings, Roelofs ditto, also 5 large pieces. Then Gabriël10 and Van de Sande Bakhuyzen11 and Valkenburg12 and Van Trigt13 and P. Stortenbeker, and Vogel15 &c. of the Dutchmen. Then there was a Mesdag that one had to imagine wasn’t there in order to see any of the other drawings, at least that’s how it was with me. The beach at twilight, stormy weather, sky with grey clouds with a ruddy glow from the sun, which had set. In the foreground a fisherman on a horse, a tall, singular, dark silhouette standing out against the white, foaming waves. This figure is speaking with people on board a pink floating in the middle ground. On deck people are busy with a lantern, and they’re evidently speaking to the man on horseback about the anchor, which he must come and fetch. It was a large, important drawing, broadly done and so powerful that, as I said, nothing else could hold a candle to it. What also struck me were 2 drawings by Ter Meulen, sheep in the dunes and ditto in the snow, he’s becoming really good. If I remember rightly, I saw that man struggling and swotting in Bakhuyzen’s studio, and now he’s succeeded all the same, those two drawings, at any rate, were excellent. Then there were drawings by Meunier, Farm-hand in a barn, distinguished in colour and treatment, and in conception reminiscent of Millet, for instance, as regards simplicity and faithfulness to nature. Also by him a stoker and a factory worker. There were also various drawings by Rochussen. And many others, but Meunier was the only one of the Belgians who actually moved me. 
   Rappard is going to Holland in 3 weeks, and will probably carry on working in the countryside this summer and then possibly go to Paris next winter, but as yet he won’t go there with the intention of staying. I believe that he really received a cold shower when he was there earlier, but that’s no reason to think that he won’t have more luck during his next stay. He’s certainly progressed a good deal since then. I’m very glad indeed that it’s been arranged for me to work here quietly for a while, I hope to make as many studies as I possibly can, for that’s the seed from which later drawings will grow. Do write to me from time to time and keep me informed, if possible, of one thing and another that strikes you, and think of me if you happen to hear of a position for a draughtsman somewhere or other. And now it’s time for the post, I’ll keep you informed of what I’m doing, and you must also tell me from time to time what you would advise me, by preference, to draw and to look out for. Sometimes I’ll find it useful, sometimes perhaps not, but don’t hesitate to tell me one thing and another, I’ll do the same to you, and then we must both try to separate the wheat from the chaff. Adieu, with a handshake in thought. Vincent My dear Theo, I’m enclosing a word or two because they’re writing to you, for I thought you’d like to hear from me as well once in a while about what I’m actually doing. If it isn’t raining, I go outdoors every day, usually on the heath. I’m making my studies quite large, like a few you saw here during your visit. So I’ve done, among other things, a hut on Het Heike and also that barn with a moss-covered roof in Roosendaalseweg, which here they call the Protestant barn. Perhaps you’ll recall what I mean. Then the mill nearby, in the meadow opposite, and the elm trees in the cemetery. And also one with woodcutters working in a wide open space where a large pine-wood has been cut down. I’m also trying to draw the implements, such as a cart, plough, harrow, wheelbarrow &c. &c. The one with the woodcutters turned out the best, and I think it would please you. Perhaps Rappard will be coming here for a while this summer, I’ve had a letter from him. In thought a handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, It’s time that I wrote you a few lines again. I must tell you that Rappard was here for 12 days or so, and has now left. Naturally he sends you his regards. We went on a fair number of excursions together, several times to the heath at Seppe, among other places, and the so-called Passievaart, a huge marsh. There Rappard painted a large study (1 metre x 50 cm), much of which was good. Incidentally, he made around 10 small sepias, also in the Liesbos. While he was painting I made a pen drawing of another spot in the marsh where many water lilies grow. (Near Roosendaalseweg.)6 We also went to Princenhage together, but Uncle7 was in bed and is unwell again. It seems to me that Rappard really is progressing in his work, from what he told me he seems to have been given a well-furnished studio at home. This week he’s going to Loosdrecht, where he intends to spend a month. He also works regularly and hard. I’ve received Cassagne, Traité d’aquarelle, and am busy studying it, even if I don’t make any watercolours I’ll probably find a great deal in it anyway, as regards sepia and ink, for example. Because up to now11 I’ve been drawing with pencil only, worked up or heightened with the pen, if necessary with a reed pen, which makes broader lines. That manner of working was implicit in what I’ve been drawing lately, for they were subjects which required a lot of drawing, also drawing in perspective, namely several workshops here in the village, a smithy, a carpenter’s shop and a clog-maker. Willemien has left14 and I’m sorry, she poses very well, I have a drawing of her15 and one of another girl who stayed here. I put a sewing machine in that one. There are no spinning wheels17 nowadays, and that’s a great pity for painters and draughtsmen. However, something has taken their place that is no less picturesque, and that is the sewing machine. 
   What’s the situation about your coming here next summer? Is there still a chance that it’ll happen? I hope so. Rappard appears to keep his own boat there at Loosdrecht, that’s rather jolly. He intends to go from Loosdrecht to Gelderland. He’d very much like to meet you, and I’ve promised him that if you were to come and I knew beforehand when, I’d let him know so that he could arrange to see you. I don’t know whether he’ll go back to Paris, he didn’t even mention it. I don’t know whether this is a sign that he’s no longer thinking about it or whether, on the contrary, he’s hatching his plan. When I think about the circumstance of his being only 23 years old and other such things, it wouldn’t surprise me if the latter was the case. You will, I hope, write when you have a spare moment. If you can manage to get me a catalogue from the Salon, please do so. Rappard told me that he was also going to buy all of Cassagne’s books. He’s still struggling with perspective, and I know of no better remedy for that disease. If I, at any rate, am ever completely cured of it, I’ll have those books to thank for it. That’s to say, the putting into practice of the theory contained in them. The putting into practice can’t, however, be purchased with the books; were it so, perhaps more would be sold. And now adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, In your last letter you wrote that there’s a good chance you’ll be coming to Holland fairly soon. I’m glad of it, because I’m eagerly longing to see you. Now that I know you’re coming, I find it even more unnecessary to send you a thing or two, which I would readily have done if you weren’t coming, so that you would see that, even if my drawings are far from being what they should be, they’re nevertheless not getting worse, in my opinion. Anyway, you’ll see what there is when you come. In my last letter I mentioned a catalogue from the Salon, I did this so that you’d remember it in the event that you can get hold of one. 
   However, if necessary I can of course do very well without it, it’s not a necessity. But something else is in fact a necessity, and if you come and it’s not too difficult for you to carry, bring me some of it. Namely white Ingres paper. I brought a supply of it from Brussels and have worked on it with pleasure, as it lends itself well to the pen, especially to a reed pen. I haven’t had any for some time now and can’t get anything here but smooth paper without grain (unless one were to take thin Whatman or Harding, but that’s a bit too expensive for sketches, Ingres paper costs 10 centimes a sheet, I think). So do your best to stuff a smaller or larger quantity into your suitcase and you’ll oblige me more than with anything else. I made another drawing in the Liesbos, and now it’s become surprisingly hot, too hot in fact to sit on the heath during the day, and I’m working at home 
   these days, copying drawings by Holbein &c. from the Bargues. Prompted by a thing or two you once said, I’ve also tried to draw a couple of portraits after photographs, and hold it to be a good exercise. As I already said, write if you can, and accept a handshake in thought. Vincent My dear Theo, I found it really nice that you were here again1 and we could talk about things again. I still think it a pity that we can’t yet be together more. Not that I attach much value to talking in itself, but I mean that I do wish we knew each other much better and more intimately than is now the case. I thought this especially during the ride back from Roosendaal, after I had brought you to the station, also because of some things we talked about during our last moments at the station. But possibly, probably, you don’t even know what that was any more. I’m glad that your letter of today holds out hope that it won’t be so very long before you come back again. I am, of course, completely better again, though I did stay in bed the day after you left and have spoken to Dr Van Genk, a thoroughly practical man, not because I thought this insignificant malaise to be worth the bother, but rather because in general, well or not well, I like to speak to a doctor from time to time to find out if everything is all right. If one hears wholesome and true words about health now and then, it seems to me that one gradually acquires much clearer notions about such matters, and if one knows more or less what one should take care not to do, and what one should abide by, one isn’t tossed about by the shifting winds of opinion, by all manner of nonsense that one hears so often concerning health and ill health. I’m also busy drawing the Exercices au fusain on the Ingres paper that you brought. It costs me a great deal of effort to stick to that work. It’s much more stimulating to draw something outdoors than such a sheet from the Bargues, but still, I set myself the task of drawing them again, thus for the last time. It wouldn’t be good if, when drawing from nature, I lapsed into too much detail and overlooked the important things. And I found much too much of that in my last drawings. And that’s why I want to study Bargue’s method once more (who works with broad lines and large masses and simple, delicate contours). And if I let outdoor drawing rest for the moment, then when I come back to it in a short while I’ll have a better eye for things than I used to. I don’t know if you ever read English books. If so, then I can highly recommend Shirley by Currer Bell, the author of another book, Jane Eyre. This is as beautiful as the paintings of Millais or Boughton or Herkomer. I found it at Princenhage6 and read it in three days, even though it’s quite a thick book. I’d wish that everyone had what I’m gradually beginning to acquire, the ability to read a book easily and quickly and to retain a strong impression of it. Reading books is like looking at paintings: without doubting, without hesitating, with self-assurance, one must find beautiful that which is beautiful. 
   I’m gradually putting my books back in order. I’ve read too much not to continue systematically to try to keep abreast of modern literature, to some extent at least. Sometimes I very much regret not knowing a great deal more about history, for example, especially modern history. Well, one won’t get any further by being sorry and having these sad thoughts; what one must try and do is simply struggle on. It gave me a great deal of pleasure to detect some truly good philosophy occasionally in your recent conversation. Who knows what a thoughtful creature you may become with time? If Illusions perdues by Balzac is too long for you (2 volumes), start with Le père Goriot, 1 volume only, once you’ve tasted Balzac you’ll prefer it to a great many other things. Remember Balzac’s nickname, ‘veterinary surgeon for incurable maladies’. By the time I’ve finished the Bargues it will be autumn, that’s really a wonderful time to draw, I’d like Rappard to come here again then. I also hope to succeed in finding a good model, such as Piet Kaufmann the labourer, though I think it will be better not to have him pose here at the house, but either in the yard at his place or in the field with a spade or plough or something else. But what a business it is to get people to understand what posing is! Peasants and townsfolk desperately cling to an idea they won’t give up, namely that one shouldn’t pose other than in one’s Sunday suit with impossible folds in which neither knee nor elbow nor shoulder blades nor any other part of the body has made its characteristic dent or hump. Truly, this is one of the petty vexations in the life of a draughtsman. Well, adieu, write if you can, and accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve only just got back from a short journey to The Hague, I’m at home alone this evening, because Pa and Ma are still in Princenhage. So now is a good opportunity to tell you about this and that. I left here last Tuesday, now it’s Friday evening. Have been in The Hague at Mr Tersteeg’s, Mauve’s and De Bock’s. Mr Tersteeg was very friendly and said he thought I’d progressed. Since I’d done the whole series of Exercices au fusain 1-60 again, I took it along. And it was certainly in response to this that he said it, because he attaches a certain value to my doing them, at any rate, as well as to my copying a figure by Millet, Boughton or others now and then, and most people think that less worthwhile. So I got some satisfaction there, also from that work. I spent an afternoon and part of an evening at Mauve’s and saw many beautiful things in his studio. My own drawings interested Mauve more. He gave me a great many suggestions, which I’m glad of, and I’ve sort of arranged to pay him another visit fairly soon when I have some more studies. He showed me a whole batch of his studies and explained them to me — not sketches for drawings or designs for paintings but true study sheets, apparently insignificant. He wants me to start painting. It was a pleasure to make De Bock’s acquaintance, I was in his studio. He’s making a large painting of the dunes which has much that is good. But that chap should start drawing figures, in my opinion, in order to produce a whole lot of other things. I believe that he has a true painter’s temperament and that we haven’t heard the last of him yet. He idolizes Millet and Corot, but, did those two take pains over the figures, yes or no? Corot’s figures may not be so well known as his landscapes, but that doesn’t mean that he didn’t make them. 
   For that matter, in Corot every tree-trunk is drawn and modelled with attention and love as though it were a figure. And a tree-trunk by Corot is something altogether different from one by De Bock. One of the most beautiful things by De Bock, I thought, was a copy of a Corot. It could hardly pass for a real one, but was nevertheless very serious, more serious than many a forged Corot in which the difference from a genuine one is less noticeable. Then I saw Mesdag’s panorama with him, that’s a work for which one must have the utmost respect. It put me in mind of what Bürger or Thoré, I think, said about Rembrandt’s Anatomy lesson. That painting’s only fault is not to have any faults. The 3 drawings by Mesdag in the exhibition11 possibly had more faults but immediately aroused sympathy, at least that’s how it was with me. Speaking of that exhibition, there was a superb drawing by Israëls, Sewing school at Katwijk. Mauve, a plough (superb), Sheep in the dunes, and also a single figure, a labourer sitting on the ground resting, in the evening. Artz had 3 drawings, if I remember correctly, a scene in an institution, old men and women eating porridge, very important, very good and serious. Also two studies of heads, full of character, man and woman from Scheveningen. Weissenbruch had, among other things, a drawing of water lilies, so simple, so full of style, so full of knowledge and love that many drawings by others couldn’t compare with it. Still, one could clearly see at this exhibition that there are a great many clever landscape painters among the younger generation, Du Chattel, among others, and Neuhuys. A. Neuhuys had a large figure drawing that was superb. A girl and two children.
   A new appearance was the work of Clara Montalba. That’s a very special talent, reminds me of Rochussen in some respects. At Mr Tersteeg’s I also saw many beautiful things by Valkenburg, Neuhuys &c. &c. J. Maris had splendid things in the exhibition, including two girls in white by a piano, and a mill in the snow. I also saw Willem Maris at De Bock’s, who has a beautiful sketch by him, a road in the winter with a little figure beneath an umbrella. By chance Bosboom saw my studies, said this and that about them, but I only wish I had more opportunity for him to help me. B. is one of those people who have a talent for teaching something to others and getting them to understand it. He had 3 or 4 good drawings in the exhibition. I was in The Hague until Thursday morning. Then I went to Dordrecht, because I’d seen a spot from the train that I wanted to draw. Namely the row of windmills. I got it done even though it was raining, and so at least I’ve brought home a souvenir from my outing. At Stam’s25 I found Ingres paper, twice as thick as the regular kind, one can do a bit more on it. But unfortunately it’s white. Could you, when it’s convenient, perhaps manage to get me some of the kind that is something like the colour of unbleached cotton or linen? Like a few of the sheets that were in the previous batch that I got from you, and like those on which the Exercices au fusain are printed. If one draws on white, one must apply a flat tone to the whole sheet before beginning. So I’ve been to The Hague, perhaps it can be the beginning of a more serious acquaintance with Mauve and others. I’d like that. I shake your hand in thought. Accept my thanks for helping me so faithfully in this. I might not have done it, because of the expense, or at least put it off. Ever yours, Vt De Bock was still very pleased with the drawings by Millet that he bought from you. My dear Theo, Even though I wrote to you only a short while ago, this time I have something more to say to you. Namely that a change has come about in my drawing, both in my manner of doing it and in the result. Prompted as well by a thing or two that Mauve said to me, I’ve started working again from a live model. I’ve been able to get various people here to do it, fortunately, one being Piet Kaufmann the labourer. The careful study, the constant and repeated drawing of Bargue’s Exercices au fusain has given me more insight into figure drawing. I’ve learned to measure and to see and to attempt the broad outlines &c. So that what used to seem to me to be desperately impossible is now gradually becoming possible, thank God. I’ve drawn a peasant with a spade no fewer than 5 times, ‘a digger’ in fact, in all kinds of poses, twice a sower, twice a girl with a broom. Also a woman with a white cap who’s peeling potatoes, and a shepherd leaning on his crook, and finally an old, sick peasant sitting on a chair by the fireplace with his head in his hands and his elbows on his knees. 8 And it won’t stop there, of course, once a couple of sheep have crossed the bridge the whole flock follows. Diggers, sowers, ploughers, men and women I must now draw constantly. Examine and draw everything that’s part of a peasant’s life. Just as many others have done and are doing. I’m no longer so powerless in the face of nature as I used to be.
   I brought Conté in wood10 (and pencils as well) from The Hague, and am now working a lot with it. I’m also starting to work with the brush and the stump. With a little sepia or indian ink, and now and then with a bit of colour. It’s quite certain that the drawings I’ve been making lately don’t much resemble anything I’ve made up till now. The size of the figures is more or less that of one of the Exercices au fusain. As regards landscape, I maintain that that should by no means have to suffer on account of it. On the contrary, it will gain by it. Herewith a couple of little sketches to give you an idea of them. Of course I have to pay the people who pose. Not very much, but because it’s an everyday occurrence it will be one more expense as long as I fail to sell any drawings. But because it’s only rarely that a figure is a total failure, it seems to me that the cost of models will be completely recouped fairly soon already. For there’s also something to be earned in this day and age for someone who has learned to seize a figure and hold on to it until it stands firmly on the paper. I needn’t tell you that I’m only sending you these sketches to give you an idea of the pose. I scribbled them today quickly and see that the proportions leave much to be desired, certainly more so than in the actual drawings at any rate. I’ve had a good letter from Rappard who seems to be hard at work, he sent me some very nice sketches of landscapes. I’d really like him to come here again for a few days. 
    
    
   The other sower has a basket. It would give me tremendous pleasure to have a woman pose with a seed basket in order to find that figure that I showed you last spring and which you see in the foreground of the first sketch.  In short, ‘the factory is in full swing’, as Mauve says. Remember that Ingres paper, if you will, of the colour of unbleached linen, the stronger kind if possible. In any case, write to me soon if you can, and accept a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
    
    
    I’ve just tried making a kind of watercolour, like the above motif.
   I count myself very lucky to be able to get models, I’m also searching around for a horse and donkey. That thick Ingres paper9 is especially good for drawing with watercolour, and a great deal cheaper than other paper. Still, there’s no particular hurry, because I have some on hand, but unfortunately plain white brought from The Hague. Anyway, you see that I’m hard at work. Uncle Cent will be going to The Hague tomorrow and will most likely speak with Mauve again about when I should next visit him. And now adieu, have walked far today and am surprisingly tired, but didn’t want the letter to leave without enclosing something. I wish you well, and accept a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. 
     My dear Theo, It gave me a great deal of pleasure to receive your letter just now, and because I was intending to write to you anyway one of these days, I’m doing it now straightaway, in response to your letter. I think it’s wonderful that you’ve sent the Ingres paper, I still have some, but no more of that particular colour. That Mr Tersteeg said what he said to you about my drawings pleases me, as does, certainly no less so, your finding progress in the sketches I sent. If it’s beginning to manifest itself, I most certainly hope to work to the utmost, so that neither you nor Mr Tersteeg will have to retract that rather favourable opinion. I’ll do my best not to betray you in this. Nature always begins by resisting the draughtsman, but he who truly takes it seriously doesn’t let himself be deterred by that resistance, on the contrary, it’s one more stimulus to go on fighting, and at bottom nature and an honest draughtsman see eye to eye. Nature is most certainly ‘intangible’ though, yet one must seize it, and with a firm hand. And now, after spending some time wrestling and struggling with nature, it’s starting to become a bit more yielding and submissive, not that I’m there yet, no one is less inclined to think so than I, but things are beginning to go more smoothly. The struggle with nature sometimes resembles what Shakespeare calls ‘Taming the shrew’4 (i.e. to conquer the opposition through perseverance, willy-nilly). In many things, but more particularly in drawing, I think that delving deeply into something is better than letting it go. I feel more and more as time goes on that figure drawing in particular is good, that it also works indirectly to the good of landscape drawing. If one draws a pollard willow as though it were a living being, which it actually is, then the surroundings follow more or less naturally, if only one has focused all one’s attention on that one tree and hasn’t rested until there was some life in it. Herewith a couple of sketches, I’m rather busy in Leurseweg these days. Also work now and then with watercolour and sepia, but that isn’t immediately successful. Mauve has gone to Drenthe, have agreed that I’ll go to him as soon as he writes to me, but perhaps he’ll be coming to Princenhage again for a day. I went to see the Fabritius in Rotterdam on my last journey, and I’m glad that you’ve seen that Mesdag drawing, among other things. If the drawing by Mrs Mesdag which you wrote about is yellow roses on moss-covered ground, then I saw it at the exhibition11 and indeed, it’s very beautiful and very artistic. 
   What you say about De Bock I find true in every respect, it’s also what I think about him, but I had never succeeded in expressing it as you did in your letter. If he were willing and able to concentrate, he’d be a better artist than he is now, to be sure. I told him frankly: De Bock, if you and I were to concentrate on figure drawing for a whole year, afterwards we’d both be completely different people from what we are now; if we fail to get a grip on ourselves and simply go on without learning anything new, we won’t even remain what we are but, standing still, we’ll go backwards. If we don’t draw figures, or else trees as though they were figures, then we’re like people who have no spine, or at least one that’s too weak. Millet and Corot, whom we both like so much, could they paint a figure or couldn’t they? I mean, those Masters balked at nothing. And he admitted that I was largely right. For that matter, I believe he has worked very seriously on that Panorama and that, too, will generally have a good influence on him, even if he doesn’t want to admit it himself. He told me the nicest thing about that Panorama, which caused me to feel a great deal of sympathy for him. Surely you know the painter Destrée. He had gone up to De Bock with a very pedantic air and had said to him, very superciliously, of course, and yet in a mealy-mouthed and unbearably patronizing way: De Bock, they also asked me to paint that panorama but I thought, since it was so unartistic, that I had to refuse. To which De Bock replied: My dear Mr Destrée, what is easier, painting a panorama or refusing to paint a panorama? What is more artistic, doing it or not doing it? I don’t know whether those were his exact words, but the reply was most certainly in this vein, and I found it very much to the point. And I have just as much respect for it as I do for your behaviour towards the older and wiser members of your club, whom you’ve left to the devices of their own seniority and wisdom while you pressed ahead with matters in a somewhat more youthful and energetic way. That is true philosophy, which makes us act like De Bock and you did on those respective occasions. One can say of such philosophy that it’s also practical, just as Mauve says, ‘colour is also drawing’. My paper is full, so I’ll finish and go out, accept my hearty thanks for your energetic support, and a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
    
    My dear Theo, Since Pa and Ma are writing, I’ll enclose a few words, but hope to write to you soon in more detail, namely after Mauve’s visit, who’s going to Princenhage soon and will also come here. I must tell you, Theo, that M. sent me a painting box with paint, brushes, palette, palette knife, oil, turpentine, in short, with all the necessaries. So now it’s settled that I’ll also set about painting, and I’m really glad it’s come to this. Well, recently I’ve done a great deal of drawing, especially figure studies. If you saw them now, you’d surely see what direction I’m taking. Naturally I’m extremely eager to hear what M. will have to say to me. Have also drawn some children recently, and I liked that very much. These days it’s beautiful outdoors in colour and tone, when I’ve gained some understanding of painting I’ll get around to expressing some of it, but we have to persevere, and now that I’m drawing figures I’ll go on with that until I’ve made a good deal more progress, and if I work outdoors it will be to do studies of trees, though actually viewing the trees as if they were figures. I mean, viewing them particularly with an eye to outline, proportion and how they’re constructed. That’s the first thing one has to consider. After that comes the modelling and the colour and the surroundings, and it’s precisely this problem that I must discuss with M. But Theo, I’m really so happy with my painting box, and it’s better, it seems to me, that I’ve got it only now, after having drawn exclusively for at least a year, than if I’d started with it immediately. I think you’ll agree with me there. 
   Now then, in my previous letter I forgot to tell you that I really think it very good that you’ll be going to London. I’d like it less if you were to move there for good, but it’s excellent that you’ll now become acquainted with it. But in the long run I don’t think you’d feel at home there, at least it’s becoming increasingly clear to me that, speaking for myself, I wasn’t really in my element there. I really do feel much more at home here in Holland, yes, I think that I’ll again become a Dutchman through and through, and don’t you think that’s actually the most sensible thing? I think that I’ll again become thoroughly Dutch both in character and in my manner of doing things as regards drawing and painting. Though I do think it will help me to have been abroad for a while and to have seen one thing and another there which is not unuseful to know. When you go to London, I’d like it very much if you would give my kind regards to my old mates George Read and Richardson. I saw Mr Obach this summer in The Hague. George Read is, if you will, a very ordinary person inasmuch as he perhaps doesn’t particularly distinguish himself, whether in business or in knowledge, but as a person and character, if one knows him rather intimately, there is no more faithful, more kind, more sensitive chap than he. He’s so nice and so witty and so capable in domestic life that in that respect he’s worth a lot as a friend. If I were allowed to choose whom I should most like to see again from those I became acquainted with in England, it would definitely be George Read, I think. Which is why, if you want to do me a favour, you must chat with him sometime – you realize I mean the elder of the two – and tell him that I hope some day to renew our earlier acquaintance and that I’ll write to him sometime. I mean to do it, though, only after you’ve spoken to him and after I’ve started to paint. Because, Theo, my actual career begins with painting, don’t you think it’s all right to see it that way? And now regards, accept a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Etten, 3/9 1881 My dear Theo, There’s something on my mind that I want to tell you. Perhaps you already know something about it, and what I’m telling you isn’t news. I wanted to tell you that this summer I’ve come to love Kee Vos so much that I could find no other words for it than ‘it’s just as if Kee Vos were the closest person to me and I the closest person to Kee Vos’. And — I said these words to her. But when I told her this, she replied that her past and her future were all one to her and so she could never return my feelings. Then I was in an awful dilemma about what to do, to resign myself to that no, nay, never, or — not yet to regard the matter as over and done with, and to take courage and not give up yet. I chose the latter. And until now I haven’t regretted that decision, even though I’m still confronted with that no, nay, never. Since then, of course, I’ve suffered a great many ‘petty miseries of human life’, which, if they were written down in a book, could perhaps serve to amuse some people, though they can hardly be considered pleasant if one experiences them oneself. Nonetheless, up to now I’ve been glad that I left the resignation or ‘how-not-to-do-it’ method3 to those who prefer it and, as for myself, plucked up a little courage. You understand that in cases like this it’s surprisingly difficult to know what one can, may and must do. But ‘wandering we find our way’, and not by sitting still. 
   One of the reasons I haven’t written to you about it before now is that the position in which I found myself was so vague and undecided that I couldn’t explain it to you. Now, though, we’ve progressed to the point where I’ve spoken about it — in addition to her — to Pa and Ma, to Uncle and Aunt Stricker5 and to Uncle and Aunt at Princenhage. The only one who said to me, though very informally and in private, that I did indeed have a chance if I worked hard and prospered, is one from whom I didn’t expect it at all, Uncle Cent. He was amused at the way I took Kee’s no, nay, never, i.e. by making light of it and sort of joking about it, bring no grist to Kee Vos’s mill of no, nay, never, for example, I wish her all good things, apart from hoping that the aforementioned flour-mill will go bankrupt. Likewise I didn’t much mind when Uncle Stricker said there was a danger I ‘would sever friendly relations and break old ties’, to which I replied that in my opinion the case in question, far from breaking old ties, could renew the old ties where they were in need of repair. At any rate, I hope to go on like this and to keep well away from melancholy and pessimism. Meanwhile working hard, and since meeting her my work is going much better. I said that now the situation is becoming somewhat clearer. First, Kee says no, nay, never, and furthermore I believe that I’ll have tremendous difficulty with the elders who already regard the matter as over and done with and will try and force me to give up. For the time being, though, I believe they’ll proceed with caution, 
   keeping me dangling and fobbing me off until Uncle and Aunt Stricker’s big celebration (in December)7 is over. Because they want to avoid scandal. After that, though, I fear that steps will be taken to get rid of me. Forgive the rather harsh terms I’m using to make my position clear to you. I admit that the colours are a little harsh and the lines drawn a bit too hard, but it will nevertheless give you a clearer picture of the situation than if I were to beat about the bush. So don’t suspect me of lack of respect for those Elder persons. Only I believe that they’re decidedly against it, and I want to make you see this. They’ll try and see to it that Kee and I can neither see nor speak nor write to one another, just because they understand very well that if we were to see, speak or write to one another there would be a chance of a change of heart in Kee. Kee herself thinks she‘ll never change her mind and, though the elder persons are trying to convince me that she can’t change, they fear that change nonetheless. The elder persons will change their minds about this matter not when Kee changes her mind but when I become someone who earns at least 1, guilders a year. Again, forgive the hard contours with which I outline things. While I find little sympathy from the elders, I think that some of the younger ones will be able to understand my attitude. Perhaps you, Theo. Perhaps you’ve heard it said of me that I want to force the issue and suchlike expressions. But who doesn’t understand how senseless it is to try and force love! No, that’s far, far from my thoughts. 
   But it’s not unfair or unreasonable to wish that Kee and I, instead of not being allowed to see one another, will see, speak and write to one another so that, getting to know each other better, we’ll be able to see for ourselves whether or not we’re suited to each other. A year of contact with one another would be beneficial for her and for me, yet the elders won’t budge on this point. If I were rich they’d talk altogether differently. Yet by now you understand that I mean to leave no stone unturned in my endeavours to bring me closer to her, and I declare that I shall love her so long That in the end she’ll love me too. The more she disappears, the more she appears. Theo, aren’t you in love too, at times? I wish you were, for believe me, the ‘petty miseries’ of it are also of some value. Sometimes one is desolate, there are moments when one is in hell, as it were, but — it also brings with it other and better things. There are three stages, first not loving and not being loved, second loving and not being loved (the case in question), third loving and being loved. I’d say that the second stage is better than the first, but the third! That’s it. Now, old boy, go and fall in love and tell me about it sometime. Keep quiet about the case in question and sympathize with me. I’d much rather have a yea and amen, of course, but meanwhile I’m really rather happy with my ‘no, nay, never’. I consider that something, but older and wiser people say it’s nothing. Rappard was here, brought along watercolours that are becoming good. Mauve is coming soon, I hope, otherwise I’ll go to him. I’m drawing a great deal and think it’s getting better, I’m working much more with the brush than I used to. Now it’s so cold that practically all I do is draw figures inside, seamstress, basket-maker &c. A handshake in thought, and write soon, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent They wanted me to promise not to say or write anything more on this subject, but I wouldn’t promise that; no one in the world, in my opinion, can reasonably demand such a thing of me (or of anyone else in the same situation). I’ve only given assurances to Uncle Cent that I would stop writing to Uncle Stricker for the time being, until unforeseen circumstances should make it necessary. A lark can’t help singing in the spring. If you should ever fall in love and receive a no, nay, never, by no means resign yourself to it! But you’re such a lucky dog that something like this will probably never happen to you, I hope. Etten, 7/9 1881 This letter is for you alone, you’ll keep it to yourself, won’t you? Old boy, It wouldn’t surprise me, Theo, if my previous letter made a rather strange impression on you. But even so, I hope you’ll have received an impression from it that allows you to survey the terrain to some extent. I tried to indicate the proportions and planes with big, straight charcoal lines. Once the indispensable outlines have been found, we dust off the charcoal with a handkerchief or a wing and search more intimately for the contours. So this letter will be written in a more intimate, less harsh and sharp tone than the previous one. First of all, I must ask if you’re at all surprised that there is love serious and ardent enough not to be chilled, not even by a great many ‘no, nay, nevers’. I imagine that, far from causing surprise, you’ll surely find this very natural and reasonable. Love is indeed something positive, something strong, something so real that it’s just as impossible for someone who loves to take back that feeling as it is to take one’s own life. If you reply to this by saying ‘but there are in fact people who take their own life’, then I simply answer: I don’t really think that I’m a man with such inclinations. I’ve acquired a great appetite for life and I’m very glad that I love. My life and my love are one. But you’re confronted with a no, nay, never, you draw to my attention. Then I say to that, Old boy, for the time being I regard that ‘no, nay, never’ as a piece of ice that I press to my heart to thaw. Deciding who will win, the coldness of that piece of ice or my warmth of life, that’s a delicate matter on which I’d rather not comment as yet, and I wish that others would also keep quiet about it if they have nothing better to say than ‘unthawable’, ‘madness’ and such loving innuendoes. If I were faced with an iceberg from Greenland or Nova Zembla, 
   I don’t know how many metres high, thick and wide, then it would certainly be a critical case if one stood in front of it and wanted to embrace the aforementioned ice colossus and press it to one’s heart and thaw it. But considering that as yet I haven’t noticed an ice colossus of such dimensions in my sea lane, considering, I say, she isn’t many metres tall, thick and wide, even with no, nay, never and all, and, if I’ve measured correctly, isn’t unembraceable, I can’t yet appreciate the ‘senselessness’ of my course of action. So as for me, I’m pressing that piece of ‘no, nay, never’ ice to my heart, I don’t know what else to do, and if I want to try and hold out until it disappears and thaws — who’s to object??? Tell me, Theo, do you think it very tactful of people to pay her a compliment because her no, nay, never is unmeltable, unthawable and irrevocable! And yet many do just that, in my opinion, by making such a fuss about that no, nay, never. Wouldn’t it be more humane of these people if they were willing and able to smile about it? I find it very sad indeed that there are so many who feel so strongly about it, but even so, I’m not planning to grow despondent about it nor to let go of the courage I’ve plucked up. God forbid. Let those who wish be despondent. I’ve had enough of it and don’t want to be other than happy as a lark in spring! I want to sing no other song than ‘love on’!2 Do you take pleasure, Theo, in that ‘no, nay, never’? Truly, I believe the opposite of you. But the fact is there appear to be some people who take great pleasure in it, and perhaps without knowing it, ‘naturally for the best, with the best of intentions’, occupy themselves in wresting the piece of ice from my breast and, without being aware of it, pouring more buckets of cold water on my ardent love than they themselves know. 
   But I maintain that many buckets of cold water won’t cool me off for the present, old boy. I find it very unchristian, especially of Christians, to believe so firmly in that no, nay, never and to attach little or no power to the ‘love on’! And I swear that I don’t understand where they get it from, such vacillation, between irresoluteness and despondency in this case. And the physics that taught them about the unmeltability of ice is likewise a mystery to me. And it’s not easy for me to regard as friends those who want to upset me or distract me or thwart me or fob me off. Don’t you find it very clever of them to have insinuated that I should just prepare myself to hear sometime soon that she’d made another, richer match, that she’d become beautiful and would surely receive an offer of marriage, that she would develop a definite dislike of me if I were to go further than ‘brother and sister’ (that was the absolute limit), that it would really be such a shame if ‘meanwhile’ (!!!)3 I were to pass up another, possibly better opportunity!!! O, whoever you may be who utters such abominations as I unwillingly repeat in the lines above, you say them in haste and clumsily and unthinkingly, don’t you? Surely you don’t want me to think that in your heart of hearts you’re really so conceited and shallow? God forbid that this should be the real you. If you weren’t friends, I would call you cowardly For I do not accept the yoke of despair. He who hasn’t yet learned to say ‘she and no other’, does he know what love is? When I was told the above-mentioned things, I felt with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my mind, ‘She and no other’. You show weakness, passion, ignorance, worldly inexperience if you say ‘she and no other’, some might suggest, ‘don’t commit yourself, find a way round it’. God forbid! May this weakness of mine be my strength, I want to be dependent on ‘her and no other’ and even if I could, I shouldn’t like to be independent of her. 
   She has loved another, though, and her thoughts are still in the past, and she appears to have qualms about the mere thought of a possible new love. There are words, however, and you know them, One has to have loved, then fallen out of love, then love again! Love on! My darling, my dearest, my best beloved. Theo, don’t think it rash or reckless of me that I’m full of enthusiasm for the victory of the Love on! Not that I’ve got it already or that she already loves me, but I’m pursuing it as if I might win her. I’ll love her so long that in the end she’ll love me too. I saw that she was always thinking about the past and buried herself in it with devotion. Then I thought: even though I respect this feeling and it touches and moves me, I still think there’s something fatal about that deep mourning of hers. So it shouldn’t be allowed to soften my heart, but I have to be as firm and sure as a blade of steel. I want to try and kindle ‘something new’ that doesn’t take away the old but instead gives it a right to exist. And then I began — at first clumsily, awkwardly and yet resolutely, and it ended with the words ‘Kee, I feel exactly as though you were the closest person to me and I the closest person to you in the fullest sense of the word, I love you as I love myself’ — and then, then she said, no, nay, never. No, nay, never, what’s the opposite of that? Love on! Who will win — I cannot decide that — God knows — I only know this one thing, though, ‘that I had better stick to my faith’. When I heard the ‘no, nay, never’ this summer, O God, how terrifying that was, even though I wasn’t unprepared for it, still, at first it was as shattering as damnation. And yes — for a moment it cast me to the ground, as it were. Then, still gripped by unutterable anguish, a thought came to me like a bright light in the night, namely this: He who can resign himself, let him resign himself, but if you can believe, believe!8 Then I got up, not resignedly but believing, and had no other thought than: She and no other!
   You will say to me, What will you live on if you win her?, or perhaps, You won’t get her. But no, you won’t talk like that. He who loves, lives, he who lives, works, he who works, has bread. There is a God — and he would that we shall love, that is the first requirement. So then, I feel calm and clear about it, and it’s precisely this that has an influence on my work, to which I’m drawn more and more every day, for the very reason that I realize I’ll succeed. Not that I’ll become something extraordinary but something very ‘ordinary’ indeed, and by ‘ordinary’ I mean that my work will be sound and reasonable and will have a reason to exist and will be able to serve some purpose. I think that nothing sets us down in reality as much as a true love. And he who is set down in reality, is he on the wrong path? I think not. But what should I compare it to, that strange feeling, that strange discovery of ‘loving’? For it’s truly the discovery of a new hemisphere in a person’s life when he falls seriously in love. And that’s why I now wish that you, too, would fall in love, but a she is needed, otherwise it’s an utter impossibility. But that she is just like other things, he who seeks shall find, although the finding itself is due to good fortune and not to merit. Seeking, though, isn’t pointless, and who, for that matter, can refrain from it? Who doesn’t seek much more than he himself realizes, sometimes without knowing it? Even though one seeks with the expectation of finding, finding is a complete surprise nonetheless. 
   It’s also a great surprise if you find something and — and — and — then you appear to be confronted not with a yea and amen but with a no, nay, never. That is at first not pleasant but terrible. But as Uncle Jan rightly says, the devil is never so black that one can’t look him in the face, it’s also like that with a no, nay, never. For my part, at least, I know that if one but seizes it with courage, one doesn’t regret it. Now you must definitely write to me, if you haven’t already done so, especially when you’ve received and read this letter. Because now, of course, I’m really longing for a letter from you, since speaking to you as I’ve done. I don’t believe you’ll think badly of me because of what I’ve said to you, but rather that you have more or less the same ideas about the matter of the general indispensability of a ‘she and no other’. At any rate, write to me soon now, and believe me (‘meanwhile’!!!) Ever yours, Vincent Old boy, How you took my two previous letters1 isn’t yet apparent to me from your letter of today to Pa and Ma. Precisely because you neither enclosed a letter for me nor mentioned receiving my letters, I take it that I’ll soon be getting a letter from you. And in the circumstances I’d much rather that you write to me after reading both of my letters, or, this one included, all three of them, which supplement one another and don’t stand alone, than that you’d have immediately answered only the first one alone. How cold and harsh my first letter must have sounded, and you undoubtedly thought then that I was already very callous and hardened. But was it wrong of me? And will you think badly of me for not immediately revealing my more tender and intimate feelings, since they would have found you, O man of business! in the fever of daily affairs, which is not exactly the mood to appreciate love stories. So I thought something along the lines of: no, first we’ll wake him up and only then will we sow softer words in His Hon. We’ll plough him first, this man who ‘deftly dispatches business’. That’s why the first letter was as cold as a ploughshare. But as to the second, was I wrong in claiming that it would be more serious and intimate? And now that we’ve begun to talk more intimately, we want to go on doing so. But ‘meanwhile’2 – a bit more ploughshare. It begins here. Although you’ve come a long way without a ‘she and no other’, although you stand firm in your shoes without a she and no other, although you deftly dispatch business without a she and no other, although you are a man of willpower, energy and character without a she and no other, although you’ve gained human understanding and experience without a she and no other, although you possess cheerfulness and high spirits and courage without a she and no other, although you dare to choose sides and loathe vacillation without Nevertheless, you would go much further, stand firmer in your shoes, dispatch business more deftly, be more a man of willpower, energy and character, gain more human understanding and experience, possess more cheerfulness, high spirits and courage, choose sides more resolutely, be even more loathful of vacillation, hesitation, doubt &c. than you have been thus far, when you’ll have found someone suited to being your ‘she and no other’. In short, you’ll be more yourself, happier and better, with an honestly meant and deeply felt ‘she and no other’ than without the same. 
   The bit of ploughshare continues — don’t let it anger you! Your letter to Pa and Ma was so gloomy in a way, and to tell you the honest truth I couldn’t make head or tail of it and don’t know what to think. Is there anything serious or not? And some of the things you said amazed me, first of all because it was you saying them, and second because you said them to Pa and Ma. After all, it’s you more than anyone who keep all your great and petty miseries of human life4 to yourself, and if you chance to voice them it is to those whom you know to be strong in whatever it is that might be making you feel vulnerable. In short, I think that when you feel insecure about something, you confess that insecurity only to someone you know can cure you of it. Indeed, just this summer5 you yourself told me that you considered it better not to speak of life’s difficulties but thought it better to keep them to yourself in order, you said, not to lose your resilience. I found such strength of mind very impressive, even though I was far from sympathizing and am aware that all too often my need for sympathy has tempted me to seek it from those who, instead of bolstering me up, tended rather to weaken my resolve. Pa and Ma are really good, but they have little idea of one’s actual state of mind and the actual circumstances of either you or me. They love us, especially you, with all their heart, and at bottom we, you and I both, love them truly. But alas! In many cases they cannot give us practical advice, and there are instances when they don’t understand us, no matter how hard they try. It’s not that they or we are to blame as much as the difference in age and a different way of thinking, the difference in circumstances. I do believe, Theo, that no matter how great the love you and Pa and Ma feel for one another, they nevertheless imagine you to be very different from what you really are. And I think that you and I would do better to talk about business as well as about more intimate affairs of the heart with people like Mr Tersteeg and Mauve, for instance, than with Pa and Ma. Is the ploughshare very cold and sharp — old boy? 
   I say this from my own experience. Still, I don’t mean to say that we should hide our hearts’ secrets from Pa and Ma and not give them our trust. God forbid. It’s also not my opinion that Pa and Ma’s advice is wrong or silly. God forbid that too. But we shouldn’t expect from them such practical and such indispensable advice as others would perhaps be able to give us (Mr T. and M., for instance) who understand more from half a word than Pa and Ma from a careful explanation. I consider it possible that I’m wrong about this, but think about it and share your thoughts on the matter with me, if you will. But — that our home is and will continue to be our refuge, come what may, and we do well to appreciate this and are obliged for our part to honour that home — I agree with you entirely on that score, though you probably didn’t expect such a frank declaration from me. Even so, there’s a refuge that is better, more necessary, more indispensable than our home with Pa and Ma, no matter how good, how necessary, how indispensable that may be, and that is our own hearth and home with our respective ‘she and no other’. So then, O man of business, who dispatches business deftly, behold your greatest business affair, your own home with your own ‘she and no other’. Behold, in my view, the point which you do well to keep sight of, the remedy which, more than any other ‘tonic’, will stimulate and renew more and more every day your courage to face life, your high spirits, your vigour and energy. Several things you said in your letter of today now make me say: Suppose there were a special reason for you to be more than ever on the qui vive and to act forcefully and intelligently, suppose someone were trying to undermine you and there were some trouble or predicament, don’t forget that you’re 26 years old7 and in ‘the prime of life’. Strike the best blow you’ve ever struck! Thoroughly renew yourself! By being especially on the qui vive in the sense that you look at girls somewhat more seriously and observantly, and see for once whether your ‘she and no other’ isn’t among them. Here ends the ploughshare. 
   Perhaps you remember that we talked this summer about the question of women, both with a kind of despondency. That we felt, or thought we felt, something like, Woman is the desolation of the righteous man. And — and — I and possibly you too, at least a little bit, were in our view ‘the Mr Righteous in question’. Whether the above words are true or not I’m in no position to say, because since this summer I’ve begun to doubt if I actually knew then, first ‘what a woman is’, and second ‘what a righteous man is’. And I set out to examine both questions more closely, the result of such examination being that now I often say to myself,  You don’t yet know what a woman is,  you don’t yet know what a righteous man is, except that you aren’t yet such a one. Which is completely different from my frame of mind this summer. Not I but père Michelet says to all young men like you and me, ‘a woman must breathe upon you if you’re to be a man’. She has breathed upon me, my dear chap!10 What do you mean? Because three times she has answered ‘never’. That, my dear chap, is one of their ways of breathing upon a monster, and there’s the monster who turns into a man! For love of her! She and no other! Do you understand, my dear chap? In the same way and conversely must ‘a man breathe upon a woman if she is to be a woman’? I think so very certainly. If you ask me, How to breathe on her? Here’s my clear and simple answer, By setting against her ‘never’ these other words, ‘my dear, I love you and you will love me, may God help us’. One must have loved, and have fallen out of love, and love on!11 Do you understand, my dear chap?   No! where is thy sting? Never, where is thy victory!12 To love again, it is God’s will! Do you understand ─ my dear chap? 
   Behold, therefore, a love story for you, man of business! Do you think it very tedious and very sentimental? Once I’d firmly resolved neither to leave her nor to return from following after her, even if this might incur her displeasure at first, once I clung simply and solely to the ‘she and no other’ and the ‘love on’, then I felt a certain calm and determination. Then my despondency also disappeared, then all things became new14 for me, then, too, my physical energy increased. And even though I haven’t yet come to the end of the no, nay, never, and unfortunately therefore am to this day a soul in need, I still consider my conduct unregrettable. By this I don’t mean to say that I did not, do not or will not do any clumsy, awkward things, but that the mistakes I did make, am making and will yet make don’t alter the fact that there’s a straight path before me upon which I walk, and that the ‘she and no other’ and the ‘love on’ are principles which I do well to adhere to. There are, however, those who think that I ought to have resigned myself and think that it goes ‘against the rules’ not to consider myself defeated, but if one says of my declaration of this summer, ‘the cat gets the birds who sing too soon’, then you know the verse, Indeed, he lost feathers galore, But what, my fine sirs, was in store? They grew better than ever before. And as for ‘the rejection’ I got this summer, I’d be ashamed if I hadn’t got it. I won’t trade it for ‘no rejection’ (it was suggested that I view it as ‘not having happened’, but I said ‘it did happen’) in the sense of ‘not having happened’, but only for ‘no rejection’ in the sense of ‘love on’! 
   Now, however, it’s ‘a petty misery of human life’ for me that I can’t even occasionally visit her or write to her, and that those who, with me, might exert a wholesome influence on the undermining or bankrupting of that ‘no, nay, never’ instead rather too readily bring grist to the mill of ‘no, nay, never’. I would that she found no sympathy, anywhere or from anyone, for her ‘no, nay, never’, and that all would combine their efforts culpably to bankrupt that ‘no, nay, never’. In short, to reduce it once and for all to a monument, warning other no-nay-never-saying ladies and encouraging those who say ‘love on’. But we haven’t reached that point yet; but you, you Theo, don’t be for the ‘no, nay, never’ but instead for the ‘love on’! I’d think it very decent of you if, for example, you were to find a way of persuading Pa and Ma, who are extremely pessimistic about this and call what I did this summer ‘untimely’ and ‘indelicate’ (until I begged them very decidedly and definitely, after first having used more temperate reasoning in vain, no longer to apply such expressions to this love of mine, because otherwise I would be forced, proud as a lion, to go against them), I should, I say, think it very decent of you if you were to move them to less pessimism and more good courage and humanity. A word from you probably has more influence on them than anything I could say, and it would be so good, both for them and for me, if, instead of trying to thwart me in 
   my progress, they let me quietly proceed. They would, for instance, like me to break off all correspondence whatsoever with Uncle and Aunt Stricker. Naturally I can’t promise anything of the kind, and even if I were to cut off my correspondence with them for a while, I’d only take it up again afterwards with renewed vigour. She doesn’t want to read my letters but — but — but — the frost and winter cold is all too bitter to last for long. I find it much healthier and more natural that, when I first spoke to her of these things, she responded so very energetically with that ‘no, nay, never’. Precisely that — gives me the assurance that there existed some fatal condition and the hope that I’ve touched upon the very heart of that condition of wrapping oneself up in the past too much. Now there follows a crisis of indignation, but the operating surgeon laughs up his sleeve and says ‘touché’. Between you and me! Let this be between you and me! Listen, Theo, she mustn’t find out that I’m laughing up my sleeve about the result of the lancet’s cut. I’m rather repentant towards her, of course. ‘Have I hurt you? Oh, how coarse and hard I’ve been! How could I have been like that?’ That’s my attitude towards her. Very contrite and humble letter to Uncle Stricker, but nonetheless said ‘she and no other’ to His Hon. You won’t betray me, brother! Viewing what has happened as not having happened, that’s nothing but nonsense and humbug. I’ll have none of it. Old chap, I’m so happy about ‘that rejection’, I’d really like to shout it to the skies, but I have to keep quiet. And attack her again in some way or other. But how to approach her? How to get near her? Some time or other, very unexpectedly and unforeseen. Because if I don’t stick to my guns, that fatal condition of wrapping oneself up in the past too much will return seven times stronger, and the matter of ‘love on’ is indeed such a good thing and surely worth surrendering one’s soul to. 
   Well, I’ve grumbled a bit about Pa and Ma, but except that they really don’t have the remotest idea of how matters stand, and understand nothing of the ‘love on’, and could think of nothing else to say than untimely and indelicate until I stopped them, they are very good to me, and kinder than ever. But I would rather that they had a little more understanding of my thoughts and view of things. They think along the lines of a kind of resignation strategy regarding many things to which I cannot resign myself. Well, a letter from you making light of the no, nay, never would possibly prove very effective. This summer, for instance, a single word from Ma would have given me the opportunity to say many things to her that couldn’t be said in public. She resolutely refused to say that word, however; instead, she cut short my opportunity. And came to me with a face full of pity and all kinds of consoling words, and without doubt she said a very nice prayer for me that would have granted me the strength to resign myself anyway. But until now that prayer has gone unanswered, and instead I’ve been given the strength to act. You understand that someone who wants to act cannot entirely approve of his mother praying for resignation for him. And also finds her consoling words slightly misplaced, so long as he doesn’t despair but says from the bottom of his heart, I do not accept the yoke of despair. I would that she hadn’t prayed for me but had given me the opportunity for an intimate conversation with her. Furthermore, instead of bringing grist to the mill of no, nay, never, she could have looked after my interests, when Kee spoke confidentially to her and poured her heart out, and instead of going along with no, nay, never, she could have said ‘love on’. I tell you these things to prove that an energetic ‘love on’! from you, directed at Pa and Ma, would be doing me a true kindness. For I’m right in thinking, am I not, brother, that we aren’t just brothers but also friends and kindred spirits, especially with respect to Love on? Adieu, write soon, a handshake in thought, believe me Ever yours, Vincent Since I love ‘in reality’ there’s also more reality in my drawings, and I’m now sitting in the little room, writing to you with a whole collection of men, women, children from Het Heike &c. all around me. Mauve is ill, but Pa and Ma have asked him to come here and get well as soon as he can make the journey. Dear brother, I received your letter but think that it’s only an answer to my no. 1. In no. 2 and no. 32 you obviously found ‘a rebuke’ as thanks for your advice: ‘be careful not to indulge too much in idle fancies before you know for sure that it isn’t a futile undertaking’. Because you’ve already had to swallow that rebuke anyway, I won’t repeat it. Much good may it do you, old boy! Fortunately for you, at least you haven’t committed a ‘meanwhile!!!’ yet, eh? No, neither you nor I think of meanwhile, you and I, we don’t know any better than to think that someone who has no courage or refuses to commit himself or wouldn’t dare risk his life with a smile would do better not to occupy himself with winning a real woman’s heart. From the beginning of this love I’ve felt that unless I threw myself into it unreservedly, committing myself to it whole-heartedly, fully and forever, there would be absolutely no chance for me, and if I’ve thrown myself into it in the above-mentioned way, that doesn’t alter the fact that the chance is very small. But does it matter to me if the chance is larger or smaller? I mean, must I, can I, take that into account when I love? No — no thought to the winnings — one loves because one loves. To love — what a business! Just imagine what a real woman would think if she noticed that someone proposed to her, refusing to commit himself — wouldn’t she say something worse to him than ‘no, nay, never’? Oh Theo — let’s not talk about it, if you and I love then we love, that’s all there is to it. And then we keep a clear head and don’t cloud our minds nor restrain our feelings nor quench the fire and the light — but say simply, thank God — I love. What, moreover, would a real woman think of a lover who came to her feeling certain of his success? I wouldn’t give tuppence for his result with someone like Kee Vos, and not for a hundred thousand more would I trade his result with the present no, nay, never. 
   I’ve sent you a few drawings because I thought, perhaps he’ll find something of Het Heike in them. Tell me now why they’re unsaleable; how could I make saleable ones? Because I’d like to earn some travelling money now and then to go and plumb the depths of the no, nay, never. You mustn’t inform the Rev. Dr J.P.S. of my intentions! Because if I come very unexpectedly it’s possible he won’t be able to do anything but turn a blind eye to it for the sake of peace and quiet.  Such a man as the Rev. Dr J.P.S. becomes a completely different person if you love his daughter than he was before then, in the mind of the person concerned with ‘the case in question’. He then becomes quite gigantic and takes on unheard-of proportions! All the same, if one loves his daughter one is more afraid of not going to him than of going to him, even though one knows he can do terrible things in the circumstances. Anyway — these days I really feel: ‘I have a draughtsman’s fist’, and I’m very glad to possess such an instrument, even though it’s still rather awkward. The Ingres paper is excellent. And so you’re popularly known as the lucky dog. Also a petty misery of human life. And you doubt whether or not you really are. But what reason do you have to doubt it? That’s what I’d like to know, you see. What kind of petty miseries do you have? Some I know partly or wholly, others not at all. Do you also have petty miseries involving a lady now and then? Naturally, but I’d like to hear what manner of miseries. Surely nothing like no, nay, nevers? Or, conversely, too many depressing yea and amens perhaps? Well, your petty miseries with the ladies interest me very much. Especially because I think the same about your petty 
   miseries as I do about my own, namely that in many cases they’re due to our lack of understanding, but that they actually contain hidden treasure, provided we know how to find and secure it. Those petty miseries, or great ones, are riddles; looking for the solution — that’s certainly worth the effort. A lucky dog who complains — without reason! And they call me ‘the gloomy one’ and I ask you to congratulate me on a no, nay, never. And get very angry if people tell me that it’s dangerous to sail at sea and remark that one might drown; I don’t get angry because I think they’re wrong in saying so, but because they seem to forget ‘that there is safety in the very heart of danger’. So there, lucky dog. What’s wrong with your happiness? You certainly know how to say very piquantly what it’s like to fall in love by comparing it to the strawberry. It’s very nicely put but — being in love with a triple no, nay, never staring you in the face, and moreover a Rev. Dr J.P.S. who demands means of subsistence in the ‘case in question’, that’s what the Rev. calls it, or rather doesn’t even demand them because he (also being a Philistine8 in the field of art) thinks there aren’t any. Being in love like that, I say, isn’t exactly like picking strawberries in the spring. And that no, nay, never isn’t as balmy as a spring breeze but as bitter, bitter, bitter as a biting winter frost. ‘This is no flattery’, Shakespeare would say. Samson, though, says somewhere else And out of the strong came forth sweetness. But it’s very questionable whether Samson wasn’t a lot wiser than I am. He boldly took on a lion and got the better of it, but — will we be able to do that too? You must be able to, Samson would say, and rightly so. Enough, the strawberry season hasn’t arrived yet; I do see strawberry plants but they’re frozen. Will spring come and thaw them and will they blossom and then — then — who will pick them? 
   This no, nay, never has, however, taught me things I didn’t know, first brought home to me the full measure of my ignorance, and second that there’s a woman’s world, and much, much more. Also that there are means of subsistence. I would certainly find it considerate of people if they said (as the constitution says, everyone is presumed innocent until proved guilty)13 that people saw one another as having a means of subsistence until the opposite had been proved. One could say: this man exists — I see him, he speaks to me, proof of his actual existence is even that he is not uninvolved in a certain case, for example, ‘the case in question’. His existence being clear and obvious to me (being aware that the person in question isn’t merely a spirit but also has real live flesh and bones), I wish to take it as axiomatic that he owes that existence to means of subsistence, that he obtains them in one way or another and that he works for them. Thus I don’t wish to suspect him of existing without means of subsistence. People don’t reason like this, though, especially not the certain person ‘in question’ in Amsterdam. They must see the means of subsistence to believe in the existence of the person in question, but the existence of the person in question doesn’t prove to them his means of subsistence. Well, this being so, we must first hold a draughtsman’s fist before his eyes, not to attack him with it, though, or even to threaten him. We then have to use that draughtsman’s fist as best we can. But this in no way solves the riddle of no, nay, never. Trying the exact opposite of some advice often proves both practical and satisfying. That’s why in many cases it’s so useful to ask for advice. Even so, there’s advice that’s usable in its natural condition and doesn’t need to be turned inside out or upside down. This latter kind is, however, very rare and desirable, because it has special qualities. The former can be had ten for a penny. The latter is dear, the former costs nothing and is sometimes delivered, unasked-for, by the barrelful. ‘Meanwhile’!!! Yours truly, Vincent. 
   I’m closing this letter with a bit of advice in return. If you ever love, don’t refuse to commit yourself, or I’d rather say, if you ever love, you won’t think of not committing yourself. Furthermore, if you love, you won’t ‘feel certain’, beforehand, that you’ll succeed — you’ll be ‘a soul in need’14 and yet you’ll smile. He who feels ‘sure of what he’s doing’ in the sense that he prematurely imagines that ‘she’s mine’, before he fights the inner battle of loving, before, I say, he sails the high seas in storm and tempest, hovering between life and death — he knows too little what a real woman’s heart is, and it will be driven home to him by a real woman in a very special way. When I was younger I once half-imagined that I loved, while the other half truly loved, the result being many years of humiliation. May I not then have been humiliated too much in vain.
   I speak as one ‘who has been down’, from bitter experience, having learned the hard way. Lucky dog! What’s the matter? What aileth thee!17 Perhaps you haven’t really been a lucky dog until now, but I maintain that you’re well on the way to becoming one. I gather this from the tone of your letters. It’s as though there’s a hair in your throat, in your voice. What kind of hair is it? Couldn’t you tell me about it sometime, now that I’ve told you so much? Theo, all fathers with daughters have an object one calls the key to the front door. A very terrifying weapon, which can open and close the aforementioned front door as Peter and Paul the gates of heaven. Well, does that implement fit the hearts of their respective daughters ‘in question’ at the same time? Do they open or close with the front door key? I think not, only God and love are capable of opening or closing a woman’s heart. Will hers open up? Brother, will she ever let me in? God knoweth. I don’t know such things in advance. Etten, 12 November 1881 My dear Theo, One phrase in your letter of 6 Nov. is worth a special reply. You say: in the present situation I shouldn’t give up hope if I were you, but let the affair rest completely for the people who have nothing to do with it. That course of action, it seems to me, ‘will then surprise several people who are now interfering a great deal and will disarm them, as it were’. If, more than once before this, I hadn’t already found this tactic to be one of the best weapons, you would have told me something new. Now, though, I can only say, yes, that much I knew, but now, after that, what else do you know? Because you mustn’t forget that there are situations in which remaining defensive isn’t always enough. Especially not when the opposition’s battle-plan is based on the somewhat rash assumption that waiting defensively is probably the most I can do. If you, Theo, were in love and felt the same kind of love as I do, and why, old chap, would you feel any other kind? – then you would discover something completely new in yourself. The likes of you and I, who mostly associate with men and pursue business2 interests of one kind or another, you in a big way and I in a small way, well, we’re used to doing what we do with our heads – with a certain discretion, with a certain shrewd calculation – but just fall in love, and lo and behold you’ll discover to your amazement that there’s another power that urges us to action, namely feeling. We’re sometimes inclined to mock it a little... but all the same it’s a mistake to think that the man is mistaken who says, especially in matters of love: I don’t go to my head to ask my duty, in this case I go to my heart. He who shrugs his shoulders or shakes his head at this, I wish him happiness with his shoulder-shrugging and head-shaking, but I don’t let him upset me, and I doubt if he knows what love is. 
   Now I don’t really believe that you would wish me to view either my parents or her parents as people ‘who have nothing to do with it’ etc. On the contrary, I refuse to think that it would be unnecessary to talk to them occasionally about this and that. Especially when their inclination is neither positive nor negative, as is actually the case now, meaning not doing anything plainly for or against it. Which is an attitude that, I fear, will cause them much dissatisfaction and indecisiveness and a kind of heartache (something between remorse and no remorse), certainly giving no satisfaction. How they can stand this I cannot comprehend (it’s like something neither cold nor hot, and that has something miserable about it). They have a kind of chronic anguish of spirit4 that never comes to a crisis. They cannot come to a crisis, nor to deliverance. They put water in their wine and wine in their water. They take a step forwards, but, fearful of the consequences, they retreat; they take a step backwards, but then, too, something gnaws at them. There’s something fatal about that as well. They trust and they distrust. What to do? Be half-hearted! How pathetic you make a person! It’s a difficult position for me, for I can say nothing but Onward! If I myself were undecided, hesitant, vacillating, I could accept Pa and Ma’s attitude. Now, though, things are completely different. This love of mine has made me choose sides, and I feel energy, new wholesome energy in me, as anyone experiences who truly loves. 
   If Pa and Ma were unenergetic by nature, I’d resign myself to it, but if they wanted to, we could do a great deal that now cannot be done, and that’s why I can’t reconcile myself to it by any means. In short, it’s a peculiar difficulty, and to the best of my ability I’ll make the most of the existing situation anyway. Will Pa and Ma never make up their minds! Will they remain neither hot nor cold for ever and ever! If I ask them, you’re in favour of it, aren’t you? Then they say neither yes nor no, and guard against committing themselves. If I say, but no, you’re against it! Then they say: how could you think such a thing of us! My dear Theo, may I ask you if in fact you aren’t almost of the same mind as Pa and Ma, whose feelings I tried to define in the above lines? And if this should be your frame of mind, though I hope I’m mistaken about this, then I’d just like to say to you: Friend, I believe that you don’t love a girl and... yet... think of love If you were to have a positive outcome... then – then – you would truly know how strange an attitude of neither for nor against is, and why someone who’s in love has this advantage over you (if indeed you don’t love), that he can see inside you but you can’t see inside him. Do you know why it is, Theo, that Pa and Ma are neither for nor against, neither hot nor cold, neither satisfied nor dissatisfied? This is why, because they know what love is, but through some mental obscurement or other can’t recall it and – and – and – something is sleeping in them that must awaken. I’d like it to awaken fairly soon, it’s been idling for so long already. It’s as though they’ve taken quite a large dose of laudanum, they’re awake on the outside but the actual spirit is sleeping SOUNDLY.—.—.— 
   Oh how much precious time this is possibly wasting! But no, I don’t want to think like that. Naturally I’d wish that Pa and Ma see ardency of spirit, positively for it! But if I don’t see this – will my love be cooled by a couple of buckets of cold water? No, that won’t affect it one way or the other. If you would rather that I count you among the people ‘who have nothing to do with it and for whom I should let the matter rest completely’, then I’d nevertheless talk about it occasionally against your will and, you see, that’s what it’s like now with Pa and Ma and Uncle and Aunt Stricker, exactly the same. And to her??? Yes Can one love like I love and... in vain??? I mean... no... — God forbid. As far as Pa and Ma are concerned, I think they’d much rather that I didn’t talk to them about it, and yet I speak of it now and then against their will. Why?... to see if something is awakening. What?... The awareness that there is love, thank God, and that we, old or young, must feel its warmth and see its light. When I told Pa about it this summer – he interrupted me with an anecdote about someone who had eaten too much and another who had eaten too little, completely out of place, and it was an anecdote with neither head nor tail, which made me think, not without a shudder, is Pa in a muddle? This was perhaps from nervousness, because he hadn’t expected it – and yet it was before his very eyes, as it were, that she and I had spent days and weeks walking and talking with each other. Are those eyes of Pa and Ma all-seeing in their present frame of mind? I think not. The man whom the sight of true, serious love leaves neither hot nor cold has either been stunned in some way or he isn’t worth the leather his shoes are made of, in my opinion. 
   So what I want to say, brother, is neither more nor less than that I firmly believe that a man, no matter who he be, is unaware of something very special, a great, hidden power, hidden deep inside him, until sooner or later he’s awakened by a meeting with someone of whom he says ‘she and no other’. And also that I think that someone like you who doesn’t yet say, she and no other, does well to be on the qui vive for things that can sometimes paralyze, either completely or partially, the aforementioned great, hidden power before it awakens. Have you never done anything that could have a rather fatal influence on the development of that power that one calls love? In my opinion, to some extent. How? I’ll tell you to the best of my ability. Thinking you had to do it, you have perhaps fuelled the ambition in yourself a bit too much, and it’s become a passion in you like a fire. More tender feelings have suffered from it. That’s your case. How do I know this? Do I have grounds for my assertion? Or am I tilting at windmills? How can one know whether or not someone has ambition? (I mean ambition that’s like a fire.) One can tell from two things, first when one catches the patient suffering from the illness. Second when one notices the lack of love, or contentment with love that is wholly deficient. Please don’t get all too angry now, but count to 10 or 20 or 30, slowly and calmly, if I make it sound too bad. But if I didn’t tell you what I have to tell you, who would? It’s bad enough to tell someone: you don’t love, or you’re contented with insufficient love. But to hold one’s tongue when one has something practical to say about it is possibly a great deal worse. At any rate, I’ll now venture to continue. If a man doesn’t have less avarice and ambition than love there’s something wrong with that man, in my opinion. If a man has only love and isn’t able to earn any money, there’s also something the matter with him. 
   Ambition and avarice is a partnership inside us, very hostile to Love. Those two powers are in all of us, in seed or bud, from the beginning. Later in life they usually develop in unequal proportion, in one love, in the other ambition and avarice. But now we, you and I, at our present ages, can to some extent do something ourselves one way or another to keep the things inside us in order. I maintain that love, if it develops, fully develops, produces people of better character than the opposing passion Ambition & Co. But precisely because love is so strong, we are, especially in our youth (I mean now, 17, 18, 20 years old), usually not strong enough to maintain a straight course. The passions are the ship’s sails, you see. And someone of 20 who gives himself over completely to his feelings catches too much wind and his boat fills with water and – and he founders or he surfaces again. On the other hand, someone who hoists the sail of Ambition & Co. and none other, sails through life on a straight course without mishap, without rocking the boat until – until at last – at last circumstances arise in which he notices, I don’t have enough sail – then he says, I would give everything, everything I have, for one more square metre of sail and I don’t have it! He despairs. Oh! But now he realizes that he can bring other powers to bear – he thinks about the sail of love, scorned until today, which until now he has stowed with the ballast. And this sail saves him. The sail of love must save him, if he doesn’t hoist it he won’t make it. 
   The first case, that of the man whose little boat capsized in his 20th year or thereabouts and perished, did it not? – or no – surfaced again recently – is actually that of your brother V. who writes to you as one: ‘who has been down but yet came up again’. The second case, that of the man who said ‘everything, everything I have for one more square metre of sail’ and he didn’t have it – and yet and yet... he has it! – that’s actually the position of my brother Theo perhaps. What kind of love did I have in my 20th year? Difficult to define, my physical passions were very weak then, perhaps owing to a couple of years of dreadful poverty and hard work. But my intellectual passions were strong, and by that I mean that I was determined, without asking anything in return or accepting any favours, only to give but not to receive. Absurd, wrong, exaggerated, haughty, arrogant. For in matters of love one mustn’t only take but also give, and conversely, not only give but also take. He who turns aside to the right hand or to the left8 falls, there is no mercy for him. So I fell, and it was a miracle that I found my footing again. What gradually set me to rights, more than anything, was reading practical books about physical and moral diseases. I learned to look more deeply into my own heart and also into that of others. Gradually I began to love people again, myself included, and with each passing day I regained a little heart and spirit which for a time had been destroyed and withered and devastated, so to speak, by all manner of great misery. 
   And the more I returned to real life and was among people, the more new life awoke in me until finally I met her. It is written, thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. One can turn aside to the right or to the left, and that’s just as bad. It seems to me, exchanging everything for everything is the real, true thing, that’s it, and now both extremes, first asking everything without giving anything, second asking nothing and giving everything. Two wholly – fatal – bad things. Both damned bad. Naturally there are those who praise one or other of these extremes to a greater or lesser extent, the first supplies us with those members of society one calls scoundrels, thieves &c., usurers &c., for instance, the second supplies us with Jesuits and Pharisees, male and female, scoundrels all of them! If you tell me to ‘take care not to become too fond of that no, nay, never’ and by that you mean, take care not to give everything and take nothing, then you’re perfectly right about that, and if you tell me that then I’ll say in return that I once made such a mistake. I gave up on a girl and she married someone else, and I went far away from her and kept her in my thoughts anyway. Fatal. But, having become a little wiser after learning the hard way, I now say: we’ll just see whether, far from merely resigning ourselves, we can’t achieve, by means of tireless, patient energy, an outcome that will give us a deal more pleasure. We’ll use all of our common sense to thaw that no, nay, never.
   Theo, to prove to you that I can reason calmly, even though I love, I’ll tell you the following. If she and I were of a sentimental nature and weak of heart, then we’d have taken each other already and reaped much misery from it later. Much poverty, hunger, cold, sickness, among other things, but oh we’d nonetheless have done better to take each other than not to take each other. If wild passion urged me on and she gave in to it, then that passion would cool and my morning-after would be desolation and hers a broken heart. If she were a coquette and played with a man’s heart and the man didn’t see her coquetry, that man would be a fool but a sublime fool, if a fool can in fact be sublime, which I don’t really believe. If I ran after her with ulterior motives, money, for example, or lust, and thought, she can’t escape me for this or that reason, I would be the damnedest of all Jesuits and Pharisees (may I ‘meanwhile’11 tell you that it isn’t like that between her and me). If we were to play at being brother and sister we’d be acting like children, and that would be out of place. If I thought that the key to the front door also unlocked the heart of the woman who’s in that house, and that whether or not that woman’s heart opened or closed depended on that front door and that same key, then I’d be more fearful of the Rev. Dr J.P.S. than is now the case. If she were never, ever to respond to my feelings of love, then I would probably become an old bachelor. 
 0  If I saw that she loved another man I would go away, far away. If I saw that she took a man she didn’t love because he was rich, I would admit I was wrong and ask forgiveness for my short-sightedness, and I would say, I’ve taken a painting by Brochart for one by Jules Goupil, a fashion plate for a figure by Boughton, Millais or Tissot. Am I as short-sighted as that??? Surely my eye is, like yours, fairly steady and practised. But if she and I stand up to a new life with renewed energy, then the future is not dark. If she with her lady’s hand and I with my draughtsman’s fist are willing to work, we won’t be short of our daily bread, nor will her boy. If I hadn’t been whole-hearted when proposing to her, she’d have despised me, and now she doesn’t despise me. If I didn’t believe that God can and does work miracles in this our daily life, her no, nay, never would already have made me desperate. But now that I believe in such miracles and expect such miracles and trust in and pray to the God that works them and don’t resign myself but act forcefully, God will have mercy on me and and – Kee Vos’s no, nay, never will thaw. I’ll see that miracle, and you will too. 
 1  If we could no longer rise above earlier mistakes and faults, then you and I would be lost men. Because, however, either in our human nature or in God, call it what you will, there is ‘mercy, that he may be feared’, so there is redress of many a past and, ’tis never too late to mend, never too soon either, though. I must remain in the love of Kee Vos. You must also hoist a ‘she and no other’ sail. And then our future will be better than our past. Look, you lucky dog, maybe I’m the only one who doesn’t find your past so very good and tells you so – and my criticism is ‘hasn’t loved enough’, have many others dared say that to you? Your remedy, like mine, ‘Love on! And no time to lose’. Even being a little in love is — and you’re right about this — as you say in your letter, having something good at bottom. But, dear brother, that’s wholly inadequate. The bottom must be good, and that’s something completely different. Theo, when you’ll say a heartfelt ‘she and no other’, then I believe that the foundation is good, but before that time I see only something good at bottom. Now, though, my third sheet of paper is nearly full, and I still have something to ask you. Old chap, I must see her face again and speak to her and plumb the depths of the no, nay, never. If I don’t do it soon, something might happen at the big celebration18 that could do me much harm. 
 2  Don’t ask me to be more specific. If you were in love yourself, you would understand, but because you’re not in love yourself I wouldn’t be able to explain it to you. Theo, I do need money to travel to Amsterdam. Even if I have only a bit of travelling money, I’ll go. Pa and Ma have promised not to oppose it, provided it has nothing to do with them, as it were. I rather understand that in the circumstances. If you, brother, would care to send me some travelling money, I’ll make you a great many drawings of Het Heike and lots of other places. And they wouldn’t be any the worse if the no, nay, never began to thaw. Because the best means to go on drawing is to go on loving. Would you be able to help me out with the travelling expenses, old chap? Even if it’s only 20 francs, perhaps I’ll get another 10 from Pa (‘leaving him out of it, as it were; turning a blind eye’) and then i’ll clear off with no time to lose. do you understand, my dear fellow! Believe me always Ever yours. Friday, 18/9-1881 Dear Brother, I think that if I didn’t give vent to my feelings once in a while the boiler would burst. I must tell you something that would perhaps drive me mad if I kept it to myself but perhaps doesn’t have to weigh so heavily on my mind if only I speak openly about it. As you know, Pa and Ma on the one hand and I on the other don’t agree about what should or should not be done about that certain ‘no, nay, never’. Well, after hearing for a long time the rather crass expressions ‘indelicate and untimely’1 (imagine that you loved someone and that love was called ‘indelicate’, wouldn’t you stand up to that with a certain measure of pride and say, Enough!), and this had stopped at my express request not to use those expressions any longer, something else became the order of the day. Now it was said ‘that I would break ties’. Well, I’ve said many times with seriousness, with patience, with feeling, that this wasn’t the case at all. This helped for a time, but then it started all over again. What I did, in fact, was ‘write letters’, behold the actual offence. But when (so overhastily and stupidly, in my opinion) that awful expression ‘breaking ties’ went on and on, I did the following. 
   For a couple of days I spoke not a word and took not the slightest notice of either Pa or Ma. Reluctantly, but still, I wanted to make them feel what it would be like if ties really were broken. Naturally my behaviour surprised them, and when they told me so I answered, You see, this is how it would be if there were no bond of affection between us, but fortunately it does exist and won’t be so easily broken for the present, but now see for yourself, I beg you, how wretched words like ‘breaking ties’ really are, and don’t say them any more. The result, though, was that Pa became very angry, sent me out of the room and – and – cursed me, at least that’s what it sounded like! It causes me much sorrow and grief but I refuse to accept that a father is right who curses his son and (think of last year) wants to send him to a madhouse (which I naturally opposed with all my might)3 and calls his son’s love ‘untimely and indelicate’!!! 
   When Pa gets angry he’s used to having people, me included, admit that he’s right. Now, though, I’d firmly resolved to let his anger burst forth, for God’s sake. Also IN ANGER, Pa said something about my having to move somewhere else, but because it was said IN ANGER I don’t attach much importance to it. Here I have my models and my studio, life would be more expensive elsewhere, and working more difficult and models costlier. But if Pa and Ma said to me calmly, leave, of course I would leave. There are things that a man cannot take lying down. If one were to let himself be told ‘you’re a madman’ or ‘you’re someone who breaks family ties’ or you’re ‘indelicate’, then anyone with a heart in his body would protest with all his might. I also said something to Pa and Ma, namely that in the matter of this love of mine they were very wrong and their heart was very hardened and they seemed entirely insensible to a milder and more humane view. That, in a word, their view seemed to me to be bigoted and not broad-minded and generous enough, also that it seemed to me that the word ‘God’ would have only a hollow ring to it if one had to conceal love and wasn’t allowed to follow one’s heart’s promptings. 
   Well, I’ll gladly believe that at times I couldn’t hide my indignation upon hearing ‘indelicate’ or ‘breaking ties’, but who would remain calm if it didn’t stop? In any event, Pa, in his anger, muttered neither more nor less than a curse. But I already heard something similar last year, and thank God, far from being damned in reality, new life and new energy developed in me. So I have every confidence that it will be like that now as well, only more and stronger than last year. Theo, I love her, her and no other, her for ever. And – And – And – Theo, even though the ‘no, nay, never’ still ‘appears’ to be in full force, there’s a feeling of deliverance in me, and it’s as though she and I had ceased to be two people and had been united for eternity. HAVE MY DRAWINGS ARRIVED? I made another one yesterday, a peasant lad, in the morning, lighting the fire in the hearth where the kettle hangs, and another one, an old man laying dry twigs on the fire. I’m sorry to say that there’s still something stiff and severe in my drawings, and I think that she, namely her influence will be needed to soften that. Now, old chap, I don’t see any reason to take ‘the curse’ so very seriously, perhaps I availed myself of too harsh a means to make Pa and Ma feel something they didn’t want to hear, but isn’t ‘a father’s curse’ much more crass and harsh, really too bad! Anyway, I shake your hand, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Friday evening. Dear Brother, When I sent my letter to you this morning, meaning when I put it in the post-box, I had a feeling of relief. For a moment I’d hesitated, should I tell him or not? But thinking it over later it seemed to me that it really wasn’t unwarranted. I’m writing to you here in the little room that’s now my studio because the other is so damp. When I look round it’s full of all kinds of studies that all relate to one and the same thing, ‘Brabant types’. So that is work started, and if I were wrenched from this environment I’d have to start all over again doing something else and this would come to a standstill, half-finished! That mustn’t happen! I’ve now been working here since May, I’m getting to know and understand my models, my work is progressing, though it’s taken a lot of hard work to get into my stride. And now that I’ve got into my stride, should Pa say, because you’re writing letters to Kee Vos, thereby causing difficulties between us (because this is the fundamental cause, and no matter what they might say: that I don’t obey the ‘rules of decorum’ or whatever, it’s all just idle talk), so because difficulties have arisen I curse you and drive you out of the house. That’s really too bad, after all, and it would indeed be ridiculous to stop working for such a reason on a project that’s already started and progressing well. No, no, one can’t just let that happen. Anyway, the difficulties between 
  Pa and Ma and myself aren’t so terrible, aren’t at all of the kind that would keep us from staying together. But Pa and Ma are getting old, and sometimes they get a little angry, and they have their prejudices and old-fashioned ideas that neither you nor I can share any more. If, for example, Pa sees me with a French book by Michelet or V. Hugo in my hand, he thinks of arsonists and murderers and ‘immorality’. But that’s just too silly, and of course I don’t let idle talk of that kind upset me. I’ve already said so often to Pa: just read a book like this, even if only a couple of pages, and you’ll be moved by it. But Pa stubbornly refuses to do so. Just now, when this love was taking root in my heart, I read Michelet’s books L’amour and La femme2 again, and so many things became clear to me that would otherwise remain a mystery. I also told Pa frankly that in the circumstances I valued Michelet’s advice more than his, and had to choose which of the two I should follow. But then they come with a story about a great-uncle who had become obsessed with French ideas and had taken to drink, thus insinuating that such will be my career in life. What misery! 
   Pa and Ma are extremely good to me inasmuch as they do what they can to feed me well &c. I appreciate that very much, but that doesn’t alter the fact that eating and drinking and sleeping isn’t enough, that one yearns for something nobler and higher, indeed, one simply can’t do without it. That higher thing I can’t do without is my love for Kee Vos. Pa and Ma reason, She says no, nay, never, so you must remain silent. I can’t accept that at all, on the contrary. And if I write to her or something like that then there are ugly words like ‘coercion’ and ‘it won’t help anyway’ and ‘you’ll spoil things for yourself’. And then they’re surprised if someone doesn’t just resign himself to finding his love ‘indelicate’! No, truly not! In my opinion, Theo, I must stay here and quietly go on working and do everything in my power to win Kee Vos’s love and to melt the no, nay, never. I can’t share Pa and Ma’s view that I shouldn’t write or speak either to her or to Uncle Stricker; indeed, I feel the exact opposite. And I’d rather give up the work started and all the comforts of this house than resign myself one iota to leaving off writing to her or her parents or you. If Pa curses me for it, 
   then I can’t prevent His Hon. from doing so. If he wants to throw me out of the house, so be it, but I’ll continue to do what my heart and mind tell me to do with respect to my love. Be assured, Pa and Ma are actually against it, because otherwise I can’t explain why they went so far this morning, so it now seems to me that it was a mistake for me ever to think that they didn’t care one way or the other. Anyhow, I’m writing to you about it because, where my work is involved, that is definitely your concern, since you’re the one who has already spent so much money on helping me to succeed. Now I’ve got into my stride, now it’s progressing, now I’m starting to see something in it, and now I tell you, Theo, this is hanging over me. I’d like nothing better than simply to go on working, but Pa seems to want to curse me and put me out of the house, at least he said so this morning. The reason is that I write letters to Kee Vos. As long as I do that, at any rate, Pa and Ma will always find something to reproach me with, whether that I don’t obey the rules of decorum or that I have an indelicate way of expressing myself or that I’m breaking ties or something of the kind.  A forceful word from you could perhaps straighten things out. You will understand what I tell you, that to work and be an artist one needs love. At least someone who strives for feeling in his work must first feel and live with his heart. 
   But Pa and Ma are harder than stone on the point of ‘a means of subsistence’, as they call it. If it were a question of marrying at once, I’d most certainly agree with them, but now it’s a question of melting the no, nay, never, and a means of subsistence can’t do that. That’s an entirely different matter, an affair of the heart, for to make the no, nay, never melt, she and I must see each other, write to each other, speak to each other. That’s as clear as day and simple and reasonable. And truly (though they take me to be a weak character, ‘a man of butter’), I won’t let anything in the world deter me from this love. May God help me in this. No putting it off from today to tomorrow, from tomorrow to the next day, no silent waiting. The lark can’t be silent as long as it can sing. It’s absurd, utterly absurd, to make someone’s life difficult for this reason. If Pa wants to curse me for it, that’s his business – my business is to try and see Kee Vos, to speak to her, to write to her, to love her with everything in me. 
   You’ll understand that a father shouldn’t curse his son because that son doesn’t obey the rules of decorum or expresses himself indelicately or other things, assuming this were all true, though I think it’s actually very different. But unfortunately it’s something that happens all too often in many families, that a father curses his son because of a love the parents disapprove of. that’s the rub, the other — rules of decorum &c., expressions, the tone of my words — those are just pretexts. What should we do now? Wouldn’t it be foolish, Theo, not to go on drawing those Brabant folk types, now that I’m making progress, just because Pa and Ma are vexed by my love? No, that mustn’t happen. Let them accept it, for God’s sake, that’s what I think. It really would be mad to expect a young man to sacrifice his energy to the prejudice of an old man. And truly, Pa and Ma are prejudiced in this. 
   Theo, I still haven’t heard one word of love towards her, and to tell you the truth that is what bothers me more than anything else. I don’t think that Pa and Ma love her deep down, at any rate in the mood they’re in now they can’t think of her with love. But I hope this will change in later and better days. No, no, no, there’s something wrong with them, and it can’t be good that they curse me and want me out of the house at this very time. There are no grounds for it and it would thwart me in my work. So it can’t be allowed to happen for no good reason. What would she think if she knew what happened this morning? How would she like it, even though she says no, nay, never, if she heard that they called my love for her indelicate and spoke of ‘breaking ties’ &c. No, Theo, if she’d heard Pa cursing me, she wouldn’t have approved of his curse. Ma once called her ‘such a poor wee thing’ in the sense of so weak, so nervous or whatever.  But be assured that lurking in ‘that poor wee thing’ is strength of mind and pride, energy and resoluteness that could change the minds of many 
   towards her, and I maintain that sooner or later one might see things from ‘that poor wee thing’ that very few now expect! She’s so good and friendly that it pains her deeply to say one single unfriendly word, but if such as her, so gentle, so tender, so loving, rebel — piqued to the quick — then woe betide those they rebel against. May she not rebel against me, then, dear brother. I think that she is beginning to see that I’m not an intruder or bully, but rather quieter and calmer on the inside than I seem on the surface. She didn’t realize that immediately. At first, for a time, she really had an unfavourable opinion of me, but lo and behold, I don’t know why, while the sky clouds over and darkens with difficulties and curses, light rises up on her side. Pa and Ma have always passed for such gentle, quiet people, so kindly and good. But how can I reconcile that with this morning’s scene or that matter of Geel last year? They really are good and kindly, but even so, they have prejudices they want to impose. And if they want to act as the ‘wall of partition’4 between me and her, I doubt whether it will do them any good. Now, old chap, if you send me some ‘travelling money’ you’ll soon receive 3 drawings, ‘Mealtime’, ‘the fire-lighter’ and ‘an almsman’. So send the travelling money, if you can, for the journey won’t be completely in vain! If I have but 20 or 30 francs, at least I can see her face once again. And write a word or two, if you will, about that certain (terrible?) curse and that banishment, because I’d like so much to go on working quietly here, that’s what I’d like best. I need her and her influence to reach a higher artistic level, without her I am nothing, but with her there’s a chance. Living, working and loving are actually one and the same thing. Now, adieu with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent A word from you ‘from Paris’! That would possibly carry some weight, even against prejudices. That matter of the asylum happened last year ‘out of a conscientious conviction’, as they call it, now it’s another ‘conscientious conviction’ that’s forbidding me to write to Kee Vos. But that’s simply a ‘conscientious conviction’ based on very slight grounds, one that doesn’t hold water. No, it can’t be allowed to happen for no good reason! And if one asks Pa, ‘Explain to me the basis of your conviction’, he answers, ‘I don’t owe you an explanation’, ‘it’s not fitting to ask your father such a question’. That, however, is no mode of reasoning! Another mode of reasoning that I don’t understand either is Ma’s: You know that we’ve been against it from the beginning, so stop going on about it! No, listen to me, brother, it would really be too bad if I had to leave my field of work here and waste a lot of money elsewhere, where it’s much more expensive, instead of gradually earning some ‘travelling money’!  That matter of Geel last year, when Pa wanted to have me put in an asylum against my will!!! taught me to be on the qui vive. If I didn’t watch out now, Pa would ‘feel compelled to do’ a thing or two. Dear brother, I just received your letter. Thanks for your sympathy, thanks for ‘the travelling money’. I don’t think I’ve ever received money with more gratitude than that money from you, because it was so unbearable for me to think that if I did have to go I wouldn’t be able to. Now at least I have the assurance of being able to strike one more blow. Thanks for your opinion of my drawings, though it’s better than I deserve. Keep on writing to me about my work, don’t be afraid of hurting me with your criticism, I’ll consider such injuries proof of your sympathy, sympathy a thousand times more valuable than flattery. You write practical things, I must learn from you how to be practical, so you have to preach to me a lot, for I don’t refuse to repent and need repentance so very much!2 There’s a phrase in your letter that I’ll pick out and answer separately and immediately. I’ll copy your words. (Show me what I should believe in. Tell me if it’s enough to resign oneself when what one hoped would happen doesn’t happen, and instead of bringing about improvement withers one’s feelings.) Resign oneself! God forbid! Truly not. Can you resign yourself to a kind of damnation? Wouldn’t you say, as I do, I who am a much greater sinner than you, that ‘even though I might deserve damnation, I in no way resign myself to it but shall strive for something better, for freedom and deliverance and mercy!’ I say to you, I, Vincent, you, Theo, were not born for such resignation but for vigorous faith! Love, and stand in the freedom that love — but love concentrated on one person! — will release in you, and do not submit to that damned yoke of resignation.
   Suppose that one day a certain young person, let’s call him ‘Mister X’, met a lady whom I’ll call Mrs She. X felt something beating ‘below the left nipple’, she too ‘below the left breast’. They looked each other in the eyes and took a few hesitant steps, more or less decided. Then Mister X said, very forcefully (?), ‘It’s not possible’, adding not unsentimentally, ‘who am I to hazard such a thing?’ And she said ‘you, “something”, i.e. the “woman’s heart” that beats beneath my left breast, why have you deceived me?’ When Mister X had turned his back on her, so bravely and righteously (he thought he was being ‘Mister Righteous’), thinking that he could do it, he discovered to his great consternation that something appeared to have changed in the world, for behold, ‘the heaven was of brass and the ground beneath his feet as of iron’. He felt an unbearable thirst and knew not for what but thought he knew it was ‘certainly not for her’. And he threw himself into his business affairs with all his fervour, with all his shrewdness, but that didn’t alter the fact that ‘the heaven remained of brass and the ground of iron’, and his heart within him hardened and grew numb from unspeakable distress. And ‘she’, what do I know? – strong or weak, boisterous or serious, flippant or solemn, wretched in any case. He was in a desert. She as well. He felt, ‘I’m withering’. She asked, ‘Why am I withering? I want to blossom! Bud! Live! O God! And poor me, I can’t! I’m not allowed to!’ 
   Turn! Turn! Turn!5 The desert is the grave of many who are ‘all too strong’ who have many a ‘faithful one’ in tow. Are these things so? someone asks. Is the desert a reality or not? If it is – then it’s just as true that there’s a land of promise7 where one doesn’t die but ‘stiffens’ as Kee Vos says, just as the plant that lets its head droop in the bright sunshine stiffens again in the evening dew. The way out of the desert is to return to her. The desert is fatal and endless if one simply hikes across it with his back turned to her, saying, I don’t need either the dew or the stiffening. But if she – wasn’t faithful – and ‘meanwhile’8 took another, whether out of spite or because she yielded to ‘principalities and powers’, fathers, aunts, brothers, friends who preach Jesuitisms. Go and see, if she isn’t married yet, whether or not she wants to be rescued, and if she prefers another to Mister X then she is what she is, but she wasn’t worthy of the man’s heart and man’s love of X. The man who loved her had been labouring under a delusion which I’d call taking a Brochart or something similar to be a Boughton, Millais or Tissot. But I doubt whether it often happens to such as Theo and Vincent that they make such a huge mistake. Our gaze is steady, especially when we’ve had the figure before our eyes for a rather long time. 
   Second phrase in the letter from T. v. G. that requires an urgent answer and not a moment to lose. ‘Precisely because I know what the consequences of an irrevocably lost hope can be, I don’t dare (guess) commit myself unhesitatingly’. Ugh! Who’s talking about an ‘irrevocably lost hope’! Nonsense, the word ‘irrevocable’ doesn’t exist for the aforementioned T. v. G., who hasn’t yet hoped seriously enough. So keep on hoping!!! So have no doubts about being called a ‘lucky dog’, because it suits you very well indeed, although those who were so busy baptizing you with that name possibly had a small Jesuitical grain of mustard seed12 in them and foresaw a possible downfall. But I say that you won’t fall, and if you do fall, so be it, it will only be in order to stand up again, having consolidated your position as lucky dog. But that much more consolidated position as lucky dog must have as a basis ‘the bottom that is good’, and you know what I mean by that. A position with ‘something good at bottom’ cannot endure in the long run. Still, trample the not-committing-yourself underfoot. Be assured, though, that he who addresses a girl in such a way that he really and truly awakens something new in her, namely love, and awakens her or brings her back to real life, will always be damned and hated by many who are, on the face of it, kindly. As far as the Rev. Dr J.P.S. is concerned, in my opinion he has false shame but, what’s more, a measure of real shame in his good moments. There are (a rule with exceptions) no more faithless and hardened and worldly people than clergymen and, above all, clergymen’s wives, but even clergymen sometimes have a human heart beneath their armour of triple bronze. Regarding Pa and Ma. A man has two kinds of enemies, firstly his entrenched enemies, secondly his friends. Furthermore, he has two kinds of friends, firstly his friends and secondly his enemies, the latter sometimes doing him many favours without this actually having been their intention. The ‘key to the front door’ is an enemy that sometimes helps more than anyone: close the door in his face and he’ll come in through the window!15
   In short, only then, in my opinion, would Mister X be in trouble, if both she and he had intended it, if only for a moment – and she being married, that notwithstanding. If both she and he felt the beating of something extraordinary beneath the left nipple and the left breast, and if the ‘principalities and powers’ make it appear as though she’s accepted someone else, then there’s still at least a chance for Mr X. And Mr X would do well to take thorough stock of the situation and not rest before speaking to her face to face. If Mr X is ‘in the desert’ and she is free, he must return to her like a shot. The desert is only fatal, I think, if he has said from spite and obduracy of heart, ‘I don’t want to love her. Rather than go to her, I prefer to die and she must die too.’ If he is in the desert and she is free, then the desert will blossom as the rose16 very shortly after he turns around. For if she still hadn’t taken another, then she loved him, whether she knew it or not. Perhaps there’s something inconsistent about the various cases I mentioned there, but I prefer to leave the inconsistency rather than spoil the sentiment by searching for the correct words. If you have a love story, speak about it openly and trust in my discretion. In fact I don’t rightly know how I stand with you. 
   For my part, père Michelet does me a lot of good. Read in any case L’amour and La femme and, if you can get hold of it, My wife and I and Our neighbours by Beecher Stowe. Or Jane Eyre and Shirley by Currer Bell. Those people can tell you many more things much more clearly than I can. One has to have loved, then fallen out of love, then love again! Go on loving all the same, if we were to say ‘I’ll never love again’, this misconception would be ‘irrevocable’. It stops with the ceasing of our unwillingness. Is there ‘despair’ and ‘irreparable desolation’? Possibly, but I actually don’t believe for a minute that you or I were born for that; on the contrary, I think we were born for a bottom that is good, namely that attainment of our respective ‘her and no other’. Were I not ‘one who has been down’ but, on the contrary, one who had always stood firmly in his shoes, I’d be less than worthless to you, but because I’ve been in that mysterious, deep pit of heartache, there’s a slight chance that I can tell you something useful regarding some affair of the heart. I come to you with my drawings and practical matters to be healed, and who knows whether for my part I can’t be of some use with respect to difficulties in love. However, you still don’t know how much power to love there is in you before you’ve started revealing it to the world. First of all, though, we must say, no matter what, happy or unhappy, I want to go on loving! Thanks, old chap, for the travelling money! Very good of you! And very humane! Accept a handshake in thought, believe me always Ever yours Vincent Theo, Uncle Cent really has sympathy for me, but that doesn’t alter the fact that I think he’s done me more harm than good with respect to J.P.S. Even though you so mistakenly call yourself unbelieving, and perhaps think that you’re a materialist, even so you’re actually the first man who, if I dare to attack him forcefully, takes it well and comes back without anger. Although perhaps you now think that I’m rather strong in some ways, you’ll find me very ignorant and uneducated in a thousand other things. Alas, we become so one-sided in this fast-paced, hectic modern life. Read Michelet over again! Pa and Ma get annoyed again and again at words and expressions of mine or their tone, and are often confused as to my actual meaning and think that I want to insult or distress them. 
   Listen once more, Theo, it’s an important matter. Should such as you and I doubt ourselves? No. Truly not any longer. We really wouldn’t want to discover at the end of our lives that we’d gone through the world like sleep-walkers. God forbid. Now it’s as clear as day to me that it’s both your duty and mine to make sure that we not only love but also marry. For this we must give proof of choosing sides and having principles and believing. You call yourself unbelieving. I beg your pardon? That you aren’t. We now stand as adults, as soldiers in the ranks of our generation. We don’t belong to the one Pa and Ma and J.P.S. belong to, we must be more faithful to the modern than to the old. Looking back at the old is fatal. We mustn’t get upset if the older generation doesn’t understand us, and we must go our own way, even going against their wishes. Later on they’ll say, yes, you were right after all! I tell you what I tell myself: the time for action and energy has come, now more than ever. So put your hand to the plough!20 Being strong, one becomes strong. Believing, one learns to believe. Loving, one learns to love. We can do our duty no better than by loving sincerely (not naїvely or sentimentally, but manfully) and by loving only one in particular. In doing this we also show what we think of those who feel they can love more than one. The men and women who 
   may be considered to stand at the forefront of modern civilization, for instance, Michelet and Beecher Stowe, Carlyle and George Eliot, and how many others, they call to us, ‘O man, whoever you are, who has a heart in his body, help us to establish something real, something enduring, something true, concentrate on one occupation and love one woman. Let your occupation be a modern one, and create in your wife a free, modern soul, free her of the terrible prejudices that restrain her. Do not doubt the help of God if you do what God wants you to do, and in this day and age God wants the world to be reformed by reforming morals, by renewing the light and the fire of eternal love. By such means you will succeed, and you will also exert a good influence in your sphere, smaller or larger depending on your circumstances.’ You see, in my opinion those are the words that, by and large, Michelet says to us. Why the hell should you and I be afraid of the key to the front door? Should you and I hesitate to propose to a girl, and should we doubt that in the end we’ll succeed? Certainly it’s presumptuous to feel sure of one’s success, and yet one may believe: my inner struggle will not be in vain, and I want to fight it; despite all my own weaknesses and faults I want to fight it as best I can. Even if I fall down 99 times, the hundredth time, too, I’ll get up! And why does one talk about ‘a means of subsistence’ as though I had none? What artist hasn’t struggled and toiled, and what other way is there than struggling and toiling to find firm ground beneath one’s feet? And since when can someone with a draughtsman’s fist not earn anything? 
   J.P.S. has something good – and even though he’ll sometimes be furious at me and will perhaps curse me as well, his anger will not burn for ever. Yet I won’t win it all at once, not even if I win it all at once in the eyes of some. Just between you and me — I don’t think it at all impossible that, despite their grand appearance, the financial position of J.P.S. isn’t so very good after all. All the more reason, if he were completely worldly, to let his daughter make a good match, though J.P.S. and T. v. G. at Etten are, in spite of their position as clergymen, people as well and not UTTERLY WORLDLY. How do I know that? – because I think the same as J.P.S. about many things, but because I belong to a younger generation I go somewhat further and let go of things that His Honour still clings to. J.P.S. is more liberal in his views than Pa, but both remain standing in front of a wall that Beecher Stowe and Michelet have torn down in places, and neither Pa nor J.P.S. know those places because they haven’t delved deeply enough into new ideas. So I’m not afraid of J.P.S., though I admit there’s a chance I’ll make the acquaintance of the front-door key and perhaps of his G. damn you. But if that must happen, the sooner the better. The cannon is loaded, there’s a large bombshell in it, I know that and yet I must man the redoubt nonetheless. Perhaps they think that my fear of the bombshell is so great that I don’t dare approach. So they’re not always on the qui vive, and if I venture to go nearer quietly, then they unexpectedly see me close by! In haste they fire the bombshell, but I throw myself flat on the ground, being at an advantage because I’m calm and they’re surprised. Perhaps then the bombshell flies over me harmlessly, and then like lightning to the redoubt. Meanwhile, you see that loving is in practice not only eating strawberries. I’d have done it a long time ago if only I’d had ten guilders. 
 0  I must be certain, though, that if I go she will be at home. I’m now corresponding continuously with our sister Willemien, who’s on sentry duty and will warn me. Because she is going to Haarlem and I’ll hear from Wil when she is returning to Amsterdam. Good, dear, true old girl our sister is. Oh Theo, she has such depth, but one doesn’t see it right away! She, you, I, we all have an outer layer, a bark of lightheartedness, but inside there’s a trunk of harder wood. And hers is fine-grained! Since yesterday’s curse some calm has set in, I wrote on a piece of paper, ‘the man who curses me, who wanted to send me to a madhouse, who calls my love “indelicate”, does he love me or not, does he have a father’s heart in his body? And on what does he base his “conviction” that the above-mentioned things are his “duty”?’ I then laid that scrap of paper on Pa’s reading-desk and later in the day a change set in. I then said again what I’ve already said many times, that Pa and Ma simply must understand that I’m not their enemy, and don’t contradict them with the intention of distressing or insulting them but because it’s sometimes urgently necessary to try and explain to them why my way of thinking differs from theirs. Now we’ll see how things develop. Have started another digger, busy digging up potatoes in the field. And there the surroundings are dealt with more thoroughly. Woods in the background and a strip of sky. How beautiful the field is, old chap! When I earn more and can spend more on models, I’ll make entirely different things, you’ll see! But it’s hard work for the models too, believe me. The more so because those I use aren’t professional models, and perhaps that’s all the better! If you ever have the chance to get someone interested, I believe you can gradually start talking about me forthrightly. But in order to make better work, I’ll eventually have to start spending more on models. Now I spend 20, 25, 30 cents a day, though I can’t do that every day, but it’s actually not enough, and I could make more rapid progress by spending a little more. Now in the winter I won’t be able to work out of doors with a model very much, though I can indoors, and that’s also good. Adieu, accept a hearty handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Etten, 23 Nov. 1881. Dear brother, I’m very glad that you wrote to Pa and Ma about this and that. It seems to me that it can’t help but do some good – especially in the long run. You surely know that I’m not the sort of person to do anything intentionally to hurt Pa and Ma. When I have to do something they disapprove of, which often grieves them, wrongly, I suffer a lot as well. Don’t think, though, that the deplorable scene that took place recently was caused solely by anger. Sadly, when I made it clear that I wouldn’t go on studying in Amsterdam and later, in the Borinage, when I refused to do what the ministers there wanted, even then Pa said something similar. So there really is a long-standing and deep-rooted misunderstanding between Pa and me, which cannot be completely erased, I think. But we can show mutual respect for each other, even with regard to certain differing – frequently even contradictory – feelings, because apart from those we actually agree about so many things. If Pa were the man he used to be, I believe we’d get along better, but something has changed in Pa in recent years, I believe, not to his advantage. He’s increasingly wrapped up in trifling matters and takes them hard, and overlooks many important things or takes them too lightly. And this definitely has a physical cause, in my opinion. But what pleases me is that, perhaps precisely because at times I’ve even spoken roughly and harshly to Pa, something has awakened in him. This summer he was in a kind of ‘live and let live’ mood, and his sermons were also terribly, terribly weak. Now his sermons are getting a bit livelier and there’s more feeling in them, though I don’t always agree with them by any means! But I only want to say, perhaps it did no harm, my making the occasional remark. I think that if Pa were to understand my true meaning I could often be of some use to him, even with his sermons, because I sometimes have a completely different view of a text. But Pa considers my viewpoint inadmissible and rejects it outright. 
   But this doesn’t make me Pa’s enemy, God forbid. Nor do I view Pa as my enemy but as a friend who could, however, be more of a friend if he weren’t so afraid that I would ‘infect’ him with French ‘fallacies’ (?). Well, with respect to ‘the case in question’, as J.P.S. calls what happened between Kee Vos and me, I’ll tell you that I’ve ventured an attack on the aforementioned Mr J.P.S. By means of a registered letter, for I fear that ‘unregistered’ letters would fail to hit the mark. But he’ll have to read this one, in which I’ve tried to draw His Hon.’s attention to various matters which I’m afraid had slipped his mind to some extent and which he didn’t want to take seriously. It’s an ‘impolitic’, very daring letter, but one which will – of this I’m certain – at least make an impression on His Hon. Perhaps resulting at first, however, in a certain ‘expletive’ that His Hon. certainly wouldn’t use in a sermon. But even then, in the worst case, I think that his reaction, when my words have finally sunk in, will be: there’s truth in what you say and it wasn’t uncalled-for to draw my attention to this and that. I am, however, extremely anxious and am ready to go to Amsterdam myself, but because the journey is expensive I can’t waste my ammunition, and the journey to Amsterdam is my fall-back if my letter has no effect. Rest assured that J.P.S. is really a very clever man, and actually an artist. His books are very good and testify to deep feeling. This summer I read a short work he’s just published on ‘the minor prophets’3 and a couple of other relatively little-read books of the Bible. I have great hope that as time passes there will be more sympathy between His Hon. and me than there has been up to now. I don’t want to ‘defeat’ him but win him over. The letter I got from him a couple of months ago wasn’t unsympathetic or written in anger, only his words ‘the no is decisive’ were very definite. 
   It also said that His Hon. thought that in time affection could grow between her and me as between brother and sister. However, I consider that just as unlikely as my ending up marrying my dear sister Willemien. Only when I continued to address Kee Vos despite that letter from His Hon. did he think it necessary to put a spoke in my wheel through the intermediary of Princenhage. Which spoke had no effect. That lever wasn’t enough to make me budge. If I were bent on ‘defeating’ and destroying J.P.S. or playing a mean trick on His Hon. or deceiving him, I’d certainly regret it and my mistake would be fatal. But now it’s an entirely different matter, and the weapon I’m fighting with is ‘Reason’. By the way! you must let me hear from you again. I’ve thought so often of Mister X, about whom I wrote to you, though you probably don’t know him. If you thought I meant to suggest that a man should curtail, temper or completely suspend his passions, supposing they were ambitions in business affairs and financial matters, then you would be mistaken. On the contrary, those passions must only bear more and better fruit. They mustn’t be diminished but rather counterbalanced by Love. Provided that counterweight, Love, be so strong that the scale – no matter how heavy the side of business affairs, and I assure you, I don’t want to make them less weighty! you may even add some if you like! – provided, I say, that the scale be tipped to the side of ‘Love on’!7 ‘Greed’ is a very ugly word, but that devil Avarice leaves no one in peace, and it would surprise me very much if you or I hadn’t sometimes been tempted by him, so much so that we were momentarily inclined to say: money is the master, money can do anything, money is No. 1. Not that you or I actually bow down to that ‘Mister Mammon’8 and serve him, but he does make it amazingly difficult for you and me at times. Me through poverty lasting many years, you through a high salary. Those two things have this in common, that they are temptations to bow to the power of money. 
   Weaker or stronger in our respective temptations, neither you nor I are, I trust, destined utterly to fall prey to the money devil. But will he have no hold on us at all?  Well, that money devil shouldn’t play a mean trick on you, that you might think it a shame to earn a lot of money, and the money devil shouldn’t play a mean trick on me, that I might think my poverty commendable. No, there’s truly no merit in being as incapable of earning money as I am, and I must change that, and in order to change that you’ll give me many useful tips, I hope. But I seriously think that your attention, meaning your best, your most concentrated attention, should be focused at this time on the development of a vital force not yet fully awakened in you: Love. Your best efforts must be directed at that wing which is the weakest, the least developed in you. For truly, it is of all powers the most powerful, it makes us only seem to be dependent – the truth is, there is no true liberty, no true freedom, no irrefutable independence, than through it. Without it, sooner or later we fall. With it, we win in the end. It makes our talents fertile, also that talent for doing business and having a clear understanding of financial matters, and, in a word, love is our justification before God. Our great, sufficient justification, for only through it, through love, I say, does our sense of duty become plain and our work clear, and by loving and by fulfilling the obligations of love we do God’s will and find that peace with God that eases our conscience. Fighting against God – we do that when we continue to wander in the desert where the earth is as iron and the sky above us as brass. But not for nothing is it written in the Bible that ‘charity shall cover the multitude of sins’, and also, But there is mercy with Thee, O Lord, that Thou mayest be feared. Those are words that hold water in reality and are true. 
   Well, I nevertheless believe that you will benefit much more from re-reading Michelet than from the Bible. And as far as I’m concerned, I wouldn’t do without Michelet for anything in the world. All the same, the Bible is eternal and everlasting, but Michelet gives such extremely practical and clear suggestions, immediately applicable to this fast-paced, hectic modern life in which you and I find ourselves, that he makes us progress quickly, and we can’t do without him. And the Bible consists of layers and there’s progression in it. For example, the difference between Moses and Noah on the one hand and Jesus and Paul on the other, and in my opinion Stowe and Michelet are a continuation of the gospel, not a repetition. Take Michelet and Beecher Stowe, they don’t say, the gospel is no longer valid, but they help us to understand how applicable it is in this day and age, in this life of ours, for you, for instance, and for me, for instance, to mention someone.  Michelet even says things completely and aloud which the gospel merely whispers to us germinally, and Stowe actually goes as far as Michelet. It should come as no surprise if I tell you, at the risk of your thinking me a fanatic, that I consider it absolutely essential to believe in God in order to be able to love. To believe in God – by that I mean (not that you should believe all those petty sermons of the ministers and the arguments and Jesuitry of the prudish, the sanctimonious, the strait-laced, far from it) — to believe in God, by that I mean feeling that there is a God, not a dead or stuffed God,b but a living one who pushes us with irresistible force in the direction of ‘Love on’. That’s what I think. Proof of His presence – the reality of love. Proof of the reality of the feeling of that great power of love deep within us – the existence of God. Because there is a God there is love; because there is love there is a God. Although this may seem like an argument that goes round in a circle, nevertheless it’s true, because ‘that circle’ actually contains all things, and one can’t help, even if one wanted to, being in that circle oneself. 
   Now you, and I too, have already read Michelet once or several times. But now try and read him again! The result will be different, I think. Because then both you and I doubted and now we believe. Then we weren’t yet ready for the experience, now, at any rate, we’re much more ready than we were. Then we understood; now, though, we understand better and more. Then we reasoned, love is something fundamentally good, now we reason, Love is the foundation that is good. Then we thought, ‘we shall love’, now it has become or is becoming, ‘we love’. Who, though, are that ‘we’ ‘in question’? Oh, you don’t know them, I mean in fact Mister X and me, but what do you know of Mister X? Mister X is certainly someone who is, I think, only a figment of my imagination, or else I made him up. But concerning not Mister X but you, I meanwhile say that if you re-read Michelet’s books again seriously, a kind of inner revolution or reformation will start to take place in you, which will continue for a very long time into the future and which is without repentance, and which will bring you to that same land of promise and peace16 whither Mister X, that renowned desert traveller! (according to what I’ve heard), is also going. 
   It’s so strange that I’m so totally in the dark about what’s happening in Amsterdam. I mean that I know nothing about it other than what I feel. How can one feel something in the distance? Well, I can’t give you an explanation, but just fall in love sometime and perhaps you’ll also hear voices in the distance and see small things you imagine to be large, in the same way one assumes there is fire because of the smoke. Fortunately, it’s calm, mild weather, which has a wholesome influence on people. If it were bitterly cold with a north wind, my ‘case in question’ would be much worse. Meanwhile Uncle and Aunt Stricker’s big celebration is approaching. Pa and Ma intend to go to it. I’m very glad that you’ve written to them beforehand, because I’d prefer that their ‘moral conviction’ regarding the untimeliness and indelicacy of my love not be brought up there. Pa and Ma found it very harsh of me to go against it, but perhaps they little know that others also heed what they say, and that behind their back they are sometimes judged less cruelly than by me when they’re present. And J.P.S. himself, although truly not charming towards me at the moment, might get something into his head and take revenge and rightly so! Supposing a father hears: ‘your daughter is loved “in an indelicate way” (?)’!, wouldn’t such a person become furious! Or, if he doesn’t become furious, wouldn’t he think to himself ‘O you ungodly people! O, idiots!’ And you see, I trust that J.P.S. would do the latter, even if he were 10 times angrier with me than is now the case. But it’s strange, Pa and Ma are sometimes stone-blind to ‘manners’, even though they’re always blaming me for my lack of ‘manners and courtesy’. 
   Pa warned me, saying: Be careful with J.P.S., because he’s a man who attaches great importance to ‘conventions’. Well, I smiled to myself at this warning, thinking, You little know that during a certain conversation between you and J.P.S. this summer you failed to observe the conventions! It so happened that J.P.S. was discussing a certain theological subject with Pa, and J.P.S. cornered Pa but at the same time gave him an opportunity to defend his proposition, but Pa stuck to his guns and ‘ignored’ being cornered, which was indeed a fact, and at last J.P.S. fell silent, even though he had wanted to steer the whole discussion in a direction that would have given Pa more thorough proof of his proposition than his own opinion, which didn’t hold water, as J.P.S. had proved by cornering him. If Pa had been more alert he would have noticed that, far from disagreeing with Pa, J.P.S. stood firmer on that point than Pa himself did, and wanted to demonstrate to Pa that the matter could be defended with better arguments than those Pa had put forward. I mentioned briefly that I thought it not impossible that J.P.S.’s financial situation might be shaky. But people like him are a little like the Hamman family, for example. Such families stand firm even when they’re shaky. I even think that J.P.S. would be much better off if he had to cut back a bit than if he could go on in the same way. I say ‘go on in the same way’ because I’ve been told that he’d set up his household in a somewhat grander style, but because I haven’t been to see His Hon. for a couple of years it’s difficult for me to judge, and I don’t know if there’s any truth in it. It is however true (and I think it not impossible that it wasn’t J.P.S.’s own idea but perhaps due to nagging on the part of his wife or SONS that he started to live in a grander style), it’s true though, I say, that he’s been a bit too ambitious or has been carrying too much sail, in any case he’ll cleverly save himself! No matter what! And – and – it’s also quite possible that if he’s been speculating, he will prove to have done so successfully. Meanwhile was it rash(?), impolitic of me even to have touched briefly upon that delicate subject – as well as other, very different things — in my registered letter, and to have more or less said to His Hon., though not in the same words: it was said that you wanted to urge your daughter to make a rich match to safeguard the future of her child, but I can’t believe that you’re the kind of man who would actually play such a Jesuitical trick, and so I didn’t believe it except only for the blink of an eye. Forgive me for that blink of an eye. Apparently it was rash and impolitic of me to intervene, but it would, I believe, have been blameworthy rashness and a blameworthy policy if I had simply let matters rest and allowed things to take their course. If I hadn’t spoken, it would certainly not have prevented others from putting other truly Jesuitical tricks into His Hon.’s head, so the bitter truth could do no harm as a counterbalance. Hoping to receive a few words from you before long, believe me, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent I’ve sent a drawing to Mauve, a digger in a potato field, to give him some sign of life. I wish he would come soon. As soon as he’s seen my studies I’ll send you a few more. If you prefer that I don’t write to you so often or so much, just say Stop! But perhaps another Stop! will come of its own accord, namely that all the time left to me for correspondence will have to be devoted to her. These extremely long letters won’t go on forever. You must understand that I’m doing my best to change many things about myself. Specifically the sad state of my financial affairs, and I also think it would do me no harm to spend more time with people. Well, the best and most reliable means of improving my financial situation is certainly to work hard. Work, take pains. That’s the resource that fails the least. But that isn’t enough in itself, or rather, there are other things I must deal with. Perhaps it’s no bad thing that I lived so long ‘underground’, as it were. That I’m one ‘who has been down’. But now I don’t need to return to the abyss and would do well, I think, to fling all melancholy to the winds and to live life a bit more freely and cheerfully on the ground floor. And to revive old relationships as much as possible and to begin new ones. I’ll bump my head here and there, so be it, but I’d really like to try and persevere and see whether we can’t fight our way up completely. I’ve often thought about whether it would be good and whether it would be possible to go to The Hague for a while. Viewing my field of work here and the Brabant types as my true work. I must hold fast to that no matter what, for I’ll be able to find subjects here for years, now that I’ve got to know it a little. 
 0  But staying here with the Brabant types needn’t prevent me from seeking to form relationships elsewhere, or even from living elsewhere for a while. All painters and draughtsmen do that, don’t they? Do you know what I’d like? That Kee Vos would start saying better things than no, nay, never. Then it would be possible to make a campaign plan for an artistic expedition. First, though, I have to take up arms against ‘Jesuitry’ and expend a great deal of mental effort (not against Kee Vos, you understand! heaven protect me from ever having to wage war against her – we’re a thousand miles from that!)22 and, second, I can’t start a new campaign before ‘the one in question’ has come to a conclusion. Does Kee Vos know, and J.P.S., that without intending to, they are crossing me in the extreme? Anyway, they’ll have to make amends later!!! Which is to say that I’m counting on their accompanying me on many an artistic campaign, do you understand! And those campaigns will succeed, I’m sure! However, I’ll reserve one small exercise in revenge for later: I’d think it so nice if J.P.S. himself had to marry the pair in question of whom he’d so explicitly said that in future they would be at most ‘brother and sister’ to one another. But I’m afraid I’m busy selling bearskins that still belong to bears I haven’t yet shot. 
 1  Still, I’d like to speculate about one more bearskin. Pa said recently, ‘Out of moral conviction I’ve never wanted to influence two people to marry each other’; well, as far as I’m concerned, my conscience tells me exactly the opposite. ‘He that gathereth not with Me scattereth’, as Michelet would say. Fortunately, Michelet didn’t have Pa’s scruples, otherwise his books wouldn’t exist. And what is Pa’s big mistake? Precisely that ‘moral conviction’. And out of gratitude to Michelet I promise that if later on I come into more contact than I do now with artists who so often ‘beat about the bush’, I’ll do what I can to make them understand that they must love, one alone and that one forever. To reassure ‘art dealers’ who might think that ‘one household’ costs more than ‘no household’, I hasten to add that a married artist and his wife spend less and are more productive than an unmarried one and his mistress. Père Millet! Would he have had greater expenses than so many Italians and Spaniards who ‘live in the desert where the sky is of brass and the earth of iron’? Is a wife more expensive than a mistress? You pay the mistresses anyway, gentlemen art buyers, and those ladies laugh at you behind your back. Who is it who’s cheating you, Messrs Goupil & Cie? The immoral women or the chaste women? Although I’ve always had one sorrow after another with the no, nay, never, I keep going back with more love each time. And I’ve already experienced many more good things than sorrows, although the sorrows really were sometimes serious, to say no more about them. One is certain of sinking separately, only together can one be saved, behold one of the things Michelet can say so simply. Sometimes it seems he was deceiving himself, but later one said he was right after all. It’s also applicable to Michelet’s own books, one has to have loved, then fallen out of love, then love again.
 2  Will this mild weather be mild enough to thaw the ‘no, nay, never’ one of these days? The weather is so very calm and mild sometimes, won’t that have an influence? Will I be chucked out during or shortly after ‘the big celebration’? God forbid! Will the Trojans have let that Trojan horse in the form of a registered letter inside the walls of Troy? And if so, will the Greeks hidden in that horse, meaning the things written in that letter, overpower the fortress? Yes, I’m extremely anxious to know. This much, at least, will become clear to Mr J.P.S. this evening, that he miscalculated this summer to some extent, thinking at first that he was dealing with a slight, sentimental passion that would wither and bleed to death! Others besides J.P.S. thought so too; they thought so at Princenhage, especially Aunt Cornelie. It was strange to see Her Hon.’s surprise when, in reply to their request to stop corresponding with Kee Vos and J.P.S., I told them a thing or two about my view of ‘the case in question’. She found my ‘unresignation’ extremely wicked! Especially when I said that I believed that resignation was mostly something very unchristian and that neither Jesus nor Paul had given us an example of it! And I fell completely from grace, once and for all I’m afraid, because Aunt Cornelie appeared to have set her heart on my doing one of the following three things: first ‘demoralizing’ myself, second going mad or dying of despair, third ‘meanwhile’ looking for another lass. Well, none of those three things appealed to me, I had equally little inclination for all three, and so I proposed a fourth, namely ‘to thaw the no, nay, never’. But ‘that fourth’ was probably not part of the religious systems of those Rev. Drs who are Her Hon.’s confessors and spiritual shepherds. Tell me, Theo, wouldn’t Aunt Cornelie actually be much better off without spiritual shepherds than with them? ‘The lost sheep’ is dearer to God than 99 sheep that are so spiritual they always stay in the field of clover and never become familiar with the desert. I myself saw my child in the desert, alone and wandering and desolate, and I ran after her – the others – what do I care about them! She first, she and not ‘the others’ at all, ‘the others’ can get along very well without me, for that matter there will always be enough for ‘the others’, but there aren’t always people who understand her! And you, Theo, for which sheep will you let ‘THE OTHERS’ go? Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent. The Hague, Dec. 1881. My dear Theo, As you see, I’m writing to you from The Hague. I’ve been here since last Sunday. As you know, Mauve had planned to come and stay in Etten for a few days. I was afraid nothing would come of it or that it would be all too short and thought, I’ll go and try it another way, and if possible deal with it somewhat more drastically. I spoke to Mauve and said, would you approve if I were to come and trouble you for a good month or so – then when that time is up I’ll be past the first petty vexations of painting and will go back to Het Heike. Well, Mauve immediately installed me in front of a still life consisting of a couple of old clogs and other objects, and so I could set to work. And I also go to him in the evenings to draw. I’m staying near Mauve in a small boarding-house where I pay 30 guilders a month for bed and breakfast. So if I count on the 100 francs from you then I can manage. And Mauve gives me hope that I’ll be making something saleable quite soon. Anyway, Mauve said, ‘I always thought you were a bloody bore, but now I see that this isn’t so’, and I can assure you that these plain-spoken words from M. give me more satisfaction than a whole cartload of Jesuitical compliments would give me. 
  Mauve may write to you himself soon. ‘Meanwhile’ I’ve been to Amsterdam. J.P.S. was rather angry, although he expressed it in more polished words than God damn you. But all the same, I don’t regret my visit there. What to do now – because I must tell you that I didn’t return less in love than I went. Not because she encouraged me, though. On the contrary, for a moment or rather 24 hours or so she made me extremely miserable. But on reflection, I thought I’d noticed from a certain something that ‘things are progressing anyway’. On reflection, I say, reflecting on more than things romantic and sentimental. But it’s becoming less and less like ‘picking strawberries in the spring’5 — so much the better – the ‘strawberries’ will crop up later in their own good time! I also went briefly to see Willemien, who looks well and healthy and cheerful. What a sweet girl she’s becoming, or rather is.
   I’ve also been to see Mr Tersteeg, and of the painters I’ve met (the merry) Weissenbruch7 and Jules Bakhuyzen and De Bock. In short, Theo, every day I’ll become more of a realist in all things, I think. She, thank God, is also something very real. Well, I send you regards, also from Mauve and Jet, and believe me, Ever yours, Vincent As soon as Mauve lets me, I’ll send you another drawing, but M. says I have to save all my studies. Especially figure studies. But M. says I’ll be learning to make watercolours within a relatively short time. My dear Theo, It’s possible that you’ve been expecting a word from me to hear what I’m doing these days. And for my part I’ve been looking forward to a word from you. I’m still going to Mauve’s every day, during the day to paint, in the evenings to draw. Have now painted 5 studies and 2 watercolours, and naturally a few scratches. I can’t tell you how good and kind Mauve and Jet have been to me these days. And Mauve has shown and told me things which I can’t do straightaway but will gradually put into practice. But I must go on working hard, and when I’m in Etten again a couple of changes will be necessary, among other things I’ll have to see about renting a large room somewhere in which I can stand back a sufficient distance, otherwise figure drawing isn’t really possible, except for studying a few fragments. Anyway, I’m considering the matter with M. and I’ll write to you about it again one of these days. The painted studies are still lifes, the watercolours done from a model, a Scheveningen woman.
   Perhaps M. will write a letter to you himself soon. But Theo, I’ve been gone almost a month now, and you’ll understand that I’ve had more expenses than usual. M. has in fact given me various things, paint &c., but I’ve had to buy more of this and that, I’ve also paid the model for several days. And needed a pair of shoes, and besides, I didn’t always pay attention to every penny, so that I’ve rather exceeded the 100-franc limit, for the whole trip has now cost me 90 guilders altogether. And now I think that Pa is rather short of money and I don’t know what to do. For my part, I’d like to stay here a while longer, would even like to rent a room here for a couple of months, in Scheveningen, for example, and possibly for more than a couple of months. But in the circumstances it would perhaps be better to return to Etten. I find Scheveningen so almightily beautiful and the types and figures. But the models there cost 1. or 2 guilders a day, some of them even more. 
   But here one is in touch with painters &c. When I wrote to Pa this week for money, he thought the 90 guilders I’d spent so terribly much. You, though, will understand, I think, that this wasn’t unreasonable, because everything is expensive. But I damned well hate having to give Pa an account of every penny, the more so because everything is blabbed to everyone else, not without embellishments and exaggerations. What’s more, Pa has now spent money on an overcoat for me that hung to the ground when I got it, and was a vulgar, flamboyant style to boot. Perhaps Pa did it out of kindness, but it really wasn’t the time to do it, since we have so many expenses already, and it’s also no way to buy clothes, without consulting the person and without fitting or measuring. Pa sent the coat here, but I immediately sent it back. So I only want to say, Theo, I’m beginning to get rather hard up. 
   And I’m writing to you to tell you this. I haven’t any money to stay, I haven’t any money to go back. I’ll wait a day or so in any case and do whatever you want. Do you think it’s better that I stay here a while? I’d very much like to stay a bit longer, and not go back before I’ve progressed a great deal more. If you want me to go back immediately, that’s also fine with me. Provided I find a good room somewhere, somewhat larger than the little studio at home. Then I can potter about by myself for a while, and go back to The Hague again later. In any event, Theo, I’ve been so enlightened by Mauve as regards the mysteries of the palette and painting in watercolour. And that will repay the 90 guilders this trip has cost. M. says that the sun is rising for me but that it’s still shrouded in mist. Oh well, I have nothing against that. Sometime I’ll tell you more about how kind and good M. was. So now I’ll wait here a couple of days, awaiting your answer. 
   But if your answer doesn’t come within 3 or 4 days, I’ll ask Pa for the money to go back immediately. I still have all kinds of things to tell you which you’ll perhaps be interested in, about the way of working from a model at Etten, but as I already said, I’ll write to you about this later – soon. I’m sending you herewith scratches of the two watercolours. I have every hope of making something saleable within a relatively short time, yes, believe that if necessary it ought to be possible to sell these two. Especially the one in which M. has added some touches. But I’d prefer to keep them myself for a while, the better to remember various things regarding their execution. How marvellous watercolour is for expressing space and airiness, allowing the figure to be part of the atmosphere and life to enter it. Now would you like me to make a few more watercolours for you here? I’d like nothing better, but accommodation here and the models and the paint and the paper &c. &c. all cost me money, and I haven’t got any more. 
   So write to me in any case by return of post, and if you want me to stay, send me some money if possible. I really think that I’ll be able to make more progress now, now that I’ve heard some practical things about colour and the handling of the brush. And you can imagine that I set great store by M. not having to regret his kindness. We’ll try and pull through and put some energy into it. Now adieu, I’m counting in any case on your writing a word by return of post, address A. Mauve. Uilenbomen 198. Believe me, with a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent. I have extremely bad ink here which has something red in it that has come through in the sketches. 
    These are the subjects of 2 painted studies. One is a terracotta head of a child wearing a fur cap, the other a white cabbage and some potatoes &c. 
    Sometimes, I fear, you throw a book away because it’s too realistic. Have
                    compassion and patience with this letter, and read it through, despite its
                    severity. My dear Theo, As I already wrote to you from The Hague, I
                    have some things to discuss with you now that I’m back here. It’s not without
                    emotion that I look back on my trip to The Hague. When I went to see M. my heart was beating rather hard, because I was
                    thinking to myself, will he too try and fob me off or will I find something else
                    here? And well, what I experienced with him was that he instructed and
                    encouraged me in all manner of kind and practical ways. Though not merely by
                    always approving of everything I did or said, on the contrary. But if he tells
                    me, this or that isn’t good, then it’s because he’s saying at the same time ‘but
                    try it this way or that way’, and that’s entirely different from criticizing for
                    the sake of criticizing. Or if someone says ‘you’re ill with this or that’, that
                    doesn’t help much, but if someone says ‘do this or that and you’ll get better’,
                    and his advice isn’t deceit, look, that’s the real thing, and – and – it
                    naturally helps. Now I’ve come from him with a few painted studies and a couple
                    of watercolours. Of course they aren’t
                    masterpieces and yet I truly believe there’s something sound and real in them,
                    more at least than in what I’ve made up to now. And so I now consider myself to
                    be at the beginning of the beginning of making something serious. And because I
                    now have a few more technical resources at my disposal, namely paint and brush,
                    all things are made new again, as it were. But – now we have to put it into practice. And the first thing is
                    that I must find a room large enough to be able to take a sufficient distance.
                    Mauve just said to me, when he saw my studies, ‘you’re too close to your model’. In many cases this makes it next to impossible to take the
                    necessary measurements for the proportions, so this is certainly one of the
                    first things I have to watch out for. Now I must arrange to rent a large room
                    somewhere, be it a room or a shed. And that won’t be so terribly expensive. A
                    labourer’s cottage in these parts costs 30 guilders a year to rent, so it seems
                    to me that a room twice as large as that in a labourer’s cottage would cost
                    something like 60 guilders. And that isn’t insurmountable. I’ve already seen a shed, though it
                    has too many inconveniences, especially in the winter. But I’d be able to work
                    there, at least when the weather is milder. And here in Brabant, moreover, there
                    are models to be found, I believe, not only in Etten but also in other villages,
                    if difficulties were to arise here. Still, though I love Brabant very much, I also have a feeling for
                    other figures than the Brabant peasant types. Scheveningen, for example, I again
                    found unspeakably beautiful. But after all I’m here, and it would very probably
                    be cheaper to stay here. However, I’ve definitely promised M. that I’ll do my
                    utmost to find a good studio, and now I must also use better paint and better
                    paper. Nevertheless, Ingres paper is excellent for studies and scratches.
                    And it’s much cheaper to make sketchbooks in all formats from it oneself than to
                    buy ready-made sketchbooks. I still have a small supply of Ingres paper, but
                    you’d be doing me a big favour if you could send some more of the same kind when
                    you send back those studies. Not pure white, though, but the colour of
                    unbleached linen, no cold shades.    Theo, what a great thing tone and colour are! And anyone who
                    doesn’t acquire a feeling for it, how far removed from life he will remain! M.
                    has taught me to see so many things I didn’t see before, and when I have the
                    opportunity I’ll try and tell you about what he’s told me, because perhaps there
                    are still one or two things that you don’t see properly either. Anyway, we’ll
                    talk about artistic matters sometime, I hope. And you can’t imagine the feeling of relief I’m beginning to get
                    when I think of the things M. said to me about earning money. Just think of how
                    I’ve slogged away for years, always in a kind of false position. And now, now
                    there’s a glimmer of real light. I do wish that you could see the two watercolours I’ve brought
                    with me, because you would see that they’re watercolours just like any other
                    watercolours. There may be many imperfections in them, be that as it may, I’d be
                    the first to say that I’m still very dissatisfied with them, and yet, it’s
                    different from what I’ve done up to now, and it looks fresher and sounder. All
                    the same, it must become much fresher and sounder, but one can’t do what one
                    wants all at once. It comes gradually. I need those couple of drawings myself,
                    however, to compare with what I’ll be making here, because I have to do them at least as well as what I did at M.’s. But even though Mauve tells me that if I continue to slog away
                    here for a couple of months and then go back to him again in March, for
                    instance, I’ll then be able to make saleable drawings on a regular basis, I’m
                    nevertheless going through a rather difficult period. The cost of models,
                    studio, drawing and painting materials are multiplying, and there are no
                    earnings as yet. Admittedly, Pa said that I needn’t be afraid of the inevitable
                    expense, and Pa is pleased with what M. himself said to him, and also with the
                    studies and drawings I brought back. But I do find it utterly, utterly wretched
                    that Pa should suffer by it. Of course we hope that things will turn out well
                    later, but still, it weighs heavily on my heart. Because since I’ve been here Pa
                    really hasn’t profited from me, and more than once he’s bought a coat or
                    trousers, for example, which I’d actually rather not have had, even though I
                    really needed it, but Pa shouldn’t suffer by it. The more so if the coat and
                    trousers in question don’t fit and are only half or not at all what I need.
                    Anyway, still more petty vexations of human life. And, as I’ve told you before, I find it absolutely terrible not to be free at
                    all. Because even though Pa doesn’t ask me to account for literally every penny,
                           still, he
                    always knows exactly how much I spend and what I spend it on. And now, although
                    I don’t necessarily have any secrets, I don’t really like people being able to
                    look at my cards. Even my secrets aren’t necessarily secrets to those for whom I
                    feel sympathy. But Pa isn’t the kind of man for whom I can feel what I feel for
                    you, for example, or for Mauve. I really do love Pa and Ma, but it’s a very
                    different feeling from what I feel for you or Mauve. Pa cannot empathize or
                    sympathize with me, and I cannot settle in to Pa and Ma’s routine, it’s too
                    constricting for me — it would suffocate me. Whenever I tell Pa anything, it’s all just idle talk to him, and
                    certainly no less so to Ma, and I also find Pa and Ma’s sermons and ideas about
                    God, people, morality, virtue, almost complete nonsense. I also read the Bible sometimes, just as I sometimes
                    read Michelet or Balzac or Eliot, but I see completely different things in the
                    Bible than Pa sees, and I can’t agree at all with what Pa makes of it in his
                    petty, academic way. Since the Rev. Ten Kate translated Goethe’s Faust, Pa and Ma have read that book, because now that a
                    clergyman has translated it, it can’t be all that immoral (??? what is that?).
                    Yet they don’t see anything in it but the catastrophic consequences of an
                    unchaste love. And they certainly understand the Bible just as little. Take
                    Mauve, for instance, when he reads something deep he doesn’t immediately say,
                    that man means this or that. Because poetry is so deep and intangible that one
                    can’t simply define it all systematically, but Mauve has a refined sensibility
                    and, you see, I find that sensibility to be worth so much more than definition
                    and criticism. And oh, when I read, and I actually don’t read so much and even
                    then, only one-and-a-half writers, a couple of men whom I accidentally found,
                    then I do so because they look at things more broadly and milder and with more
                    love than I do, and are better acquainted with reality, and because I can learn
                    something from them. But all that drivel about good and evil, morality and
                    immorality, I actually care so little about it. For truly, it’s impossible for
                    me always to know what is good, what is evil, what is moral, what is immoral. Morality or immorality coincidentally brings me to K.V. Ah! I’d
                    written to you that it was beginning to seem less and less like eating
                    strawberries in the spring. Well, that is of
                    course true. If I should lapse into repetition, forgive me, I don’t know if I’ve
                    already written to you about what happened to me in Amsterdam. I went there
                    thinking, who knows whether the no, nay, never isn’t thawing, it’s such mild
                    weather. And so one evening I was making my way along Keizersgracht, looking for
                    the house, and indeed found it. And naturally
                    I rang the bell and heard that the family were still at table. But then I heard
                    that I could come in all the same. And there they were, including Jan, the very
                    learned professor, all of them except Kee.
                    And they all still had a plate in front of them, and there wasn’t a plate too
                    many. This small detail caught my eye. They wanted to make me think that Kee
                    wasn’t there, and had taken away her plate, but I knew she was there, I thought
                    it so much like a comedy or game.    After a while I asked (after chatting a bit and greeting
                    everyone), But where’s Kee? Then J.P.S. repeated my question, saying to his
                    wife, Mother, where’s Kee? And the missus said, Kee’s out. And for the time
                    being I didn’t pursue the matter but talked a bit with the professor about the
                    exhibition at Arti he’d just seen. Well, the
                    professor disappeared and little Jan Vos disappeared, and J.P.S. and the wife of
                    the same and yours truly remained alone and got ourselves into position. J.P.S.,
                    as priest and Father, started to speak and said he’d been on the point of
                    sending a certain letter to yours truly and he would read that letter aloud.
                    However, first I asked again, interrupting His Hon. or the Rev., Where’s Kee?
                    (Because I knew she was in town.) Then J.P.S. said, Kee left the house as soon
                    as she heard you were here. Well, I know some things about her, and I must say
                    that I didn’t know then and still don’t know with certainty whether her coldness
                    and rudeness is a good or bad sign. This much I do know, that I’ve never seen
                    her so seemingly or actually cool and callous and rude towards anyone but me. So
                    I didn’t say much in reply and remained dead calm. Let me hear that letter, I
                    said, or not, I don’t really care either way. Then came the epistle. The writing
                    was reverent and very learned and so there wasn’t really anything in it, though
                    it did seem to say that I was being requested to stop corresponding and I was
                    given the advice to make vigorous attempts to forget the matter. At last the
                    reading of the letter was over. I felt exactly as though I were hearing the
                    minister in the church, after some raising and lowering of his voice, saying
                    amen – it left me just as cold as an ordinary sermon. And then I began, and I
                    said as calmly and politely as I could, well yes, I’ve already heard this line
                    of reasoning quite often, but now go on – and after that? But then J.P.S. looked
                    up... he even seemed to be somewhat amazed at my not being completely convinced
                    that we’d reached the extreme limit of the human capacity to think and feel.
                    There was, according to him, no ‘after that’ possible. We went on like this, and
                    once in a while Aunt M. put in a very
                    Jesuitical word, and I got quite warm and finally lost my temper. And J.P.S.
                    lost his temper too, as much as a clergyman can lose his temper. And even though
                    he didn’t exactly say ‘God damn you’, anyone other than a clergyman in J.P.S.’s
                    mood would have expressed himself that way. But you know that I love both Pa and
                    J.P.S. in my own way, despite the fact that I truly loathe their system, and I
                    changed tack a bit and gave and took a bit, so that at the end of the evening
                    they said to me that if I wanted to stay at their house I could. Then I said,
                    thank you. If Kee walks out of the house when I come, then I don’t think it’s
                    the right moment to stay here, I’m going to my boarding-house. And then they
                    asked, where are you staying? I said, I don’t know yet, and then Uncle and Aunt
                    insisted on bringing me themselves to a good, inexpensive boarding-house. And
                    heavens, those two old dears came with me through the cold, misty, muddy
                    streets, and truly, they showed me a very good boarding-house and very
                    inexpensive. I didn’t want them to come at all but they insisted on showing me.
                           And, you see,
                    I thought that rather humane of them and it calmed me down somewhat. I stayed in
                    Amsterdam two more days and talked with J.P.S. again, but I didn’t see Kee, she
                    made herself scarce each time. And I said that they ought to know that although
                    they wanted me to consider the matter over and done with, I couldn’t bring
                    myself to do it. And they continued to reply firmly: ‘Later on I would
                    understand it better’. Now and then I also saw the professor again, and I have
                    to say he wasn’t so bad, but – but – but – what else can I say about that gentleman? I
                    said I hoped that he might fall in love one day. Voilà. Can professors fall in
                    love? Do clergymen know what love is? I recently read Michelet, La femme, la religion et le
                        prêtre. Books like that are full of
                    reality, yet what is more real than reality itself, and what has more life than
                    life itself? And we who do our best to live, why don’t we live even more! I walked around aimlessly those three days in Amsterdam, I felt
                    damned miserable, and that half-kindness on the part of Uncle and Aunt and all
                    those arguments, I found them so tedious. Until I finally began to find myself
                    tedious and said to myself: would you like to become despondent again? And then
                    I said to myself, Don’t let yourself be overwhelmed. And so it was on a Sunday
                    morning that I last went to see J.P.S. and said to him, Listen, my dear Uncle,
                    if Kee Vos were an angel she would be too lofty for me, and I don’t think that I
                    would stay in love with an angel. Were she a devil, I wouldn’t want to have
                    anything to do with her. In the present case, I see in her a real woman, with
                    womanly passions and whims, and I love her dearly, that’s just the way it is,
                    and I’m glad of it. So long as she doesn’t become an angel or a devil, the case
                    in question isn’t over. And J.P.S. couldn’t say very much to that, and spoke
                    himself of womanly passions, I’m not really sure what he said about them, and
                    then J.P.S. left for the church. No wonder one becomes hardened and numb there,
                    I know that from my own experience. And so as far as your brother in question is
                    concerned, he didn’t want to let himself be overwhelmed. But that didn’t alter
                    the fact that he felt overwhelmed, that he felt as though he had been leaning
                    against a cold, hard, whitewashed church wall for too long. Oh well, should I
                    tell you more, old chap? It’s rather daring to remain a realist, but Theo, Theo,
                    you too are a realist, oh bear with my realism! I told you, even my secrets
                    aren’t necessarily secrets. Well, I won’t take those words back, think of me as
                    you will, and whether you approve or disapprove of what I did is less important. I’ll continue – from Amsterdam I went to Haarlem and sat very
                    agreeably with our dear sister Willemien, and I took a walk with her, and in the
                    evening I went to The Hague, and I landed up at M.’s around seven o’clock.    And I said: listen M., you were supposed to come to Etten to try
                    and initiate me, more or less, into the mysteries of the palette. But I’ve been
                    thinking that that wouldn’t be possible in only a couple of days, so now I’ve
                    come to you and if you approve I’ll stay four weeks or so, or six weeks or so,
                    or as long or as short as you like, and we’ll just have to see what we can do.
                    It’s extremely impertinent of me to demand so much of you, but in short, I’m
                    under a great deal of pressure. Well, Mauve said, do you have anything with you?
                    Certainly, here are a couple of studies, and he said many good things about
                    them, far too many, at the same time voicing some criticism, far too little.
                    Well, and the next day we set up a still life and he began by saying, This is
                    how you should hold your palette. And since then I’ve made a few painted studies
                    and after that two watercolours. This is a summary of my work, but there’s more to life than
                    working with the hands and the head. I remained chilled to the marrow, that’s to say to the marrow of
                    my soul by that aforementioned imaginary or not-imaginary church wall. And I
                    didn’t want to let myself be overwhelmed by that deadening feeling, I said. Then
                    I thought to myself, I’d like to be with a woman, I can’t live without love,
                    without a woman. I wouldn’t care a fig for life if there wasn’t something
                    infinite, something deep, something real. But, I said to myself in reply: you
                    say ‘She and no other’15 and should you go to a
                    woman? But surely that’s unreasonable, surely that goes against logic? And my
                    answer to that was, Who’s the master, logic or I? Is logic there for me or am I
                    there for logic, and is there no reason and no understanding in my
                    unreasonableness or my stupidity? And whether I act rightly or wrongly, I can’t
                    do otherwise, that damned wall is too cold for me, I’ll look for a woman, I
                    cannot, I will not, I may not live without love. I’m only human, and a human
                    with passions at that, I need a woman or I’ll freeze or turn to stone, or anyway
                    be overwhelmed. In the circumstances, however, I struggled much within myself,
                    and in that struggle some things concerning physical powers and health gained
                    the upper hand, things which I believe and know more or less through bitter
                    experience. One doesn’t live too long without a woman without going unpunished.
                    And I don’t think that what some call God and others the supreme being and
                    others nature is unreasonable and merciless, and, in a word, I came to the
                    conclusion, I must see whether I can’t find a woman.    And heavens, I didn’t look so
                    very far. I found a woman, by no means young, by no means pretty, with nothing
                    special about her, if you will. But perhaps
                    you’re rather curious. She was fairly big and strongly built, she didn’t exactly
                    have lady’s hands like K.V. but those of a woman who works hard. But she was not
                    coarse and not common, and had something very feminine about her. She slightly
                    resembled a nice figure by Chardin or Frère or possibly Jan Steen. Anyhow, that
                    which the French call ‘a working woman’. She’d had a great many cares, one could
                    see that, and life had given her a drubbing, oh nothing distinguished, nothing
                    exceptional, nothing out of the ordinary. Every woman, at every age, if she loves and if she is kind, can give a man not
                    the infinite of the moment but the moment of the infinite. Theo, I find such infinite charm in that je ne sais quoi of
                    withering, that drubbed by life quality. Ah! I found her to have a charm, I
                    couldn’t help seeing in her something by Feyen-Perrin, by Perugino. Look, I’m
                    not exactly as innocent as a greenhorn, let alone a child in the cradle. It’s
                    not the first time I couldn’t resist that feeling of affection, particularly
                    love and affection for those women whom the clergymen damn so and superciliously
                    despise and condemn from the pulpit. I don’t damn them, I don’t condemn them, I
                    don’t despise them. Look, I’m almost thirty years old, and do you think I’ve
                    never felt the need for love? K.V. is older than I am, she also has love behind her, but she’s
                    all the dearer to me for that very reason. She’s not ignorant, but neither am I.
                    If she wants to subsist on an old love and if she wants to know nothing of new
                    ones, that’s her business, but the more she perseveres in that and avoids me,
                    the more I can’t just stifle my energy and strength of mind for her sake. No, I
                    don’t want that, I love her, but I don’t want to freeze and deaden my mind for
                    her sake. And the stimulus, the spark of fire we need, that is love and I don’t
                    exactly mean mystic love. That woman didn’t cheat me – oh, anyone who thinks all those
                    sisters are swindlers is so wrong and understands so little. That woman was good to me, very good, very decent, very sweet. In
                    what way? That I won’t repeat even to my brother Theo, because I strongly
                    suspect my brother Theo of having experienced something of this himself now and
                        then. The better for him. Did we spend a lot together? No, because I didn’t have much and I
                    said to her, listen, you and I don’t have to get drunk to feel something for one
                    another, just pocket what I can afford. And I wish I could have afforded more,
                    because she was worth it. And we talked about all kinds of things, about her life, about her
                    cares, about her destitution, about her health, and I had a livelier
                    conversation with her    than with my learned professorial cousin Jan
                    Stricker, for instance. I’ve actually told you these things because I hope you’ll see that
                    even though I perhaps have some feeling, I don’t want to be sentimental in a
                    senseless way. That, no matter what, I want to preserve some warmth of life and
                    keep my mind clear and my body healthy in order to work. And that I understand
                    my love for K.V. to be such that for her sake I don’t want to set about my work
                    despondently or let myself get upset. You’ll understand that, you who wrote in your letter something
                    about the matter of health. You talk of having been not quite healthy a while
                    back, it’s very good you’re trying to get yourself straightened out. Clergymen call us sinners, conceived and born in sin. Bah! I think that damned nonsense. Is it a sin to love, to need love, not to be able to do without
                    love? I consider a life without love a sinful condition and an immoral
                    condition. If there’s anything I regret, it’s that for a time I let mystical and
                    theological profundities seduce me into withdrawing too much inside myself. I’ve
                    gradually stopped doing that. If you wake up in the morning and you’re not alone
                    and you see in the twilight a fellow human being, it makes the world so much
                    more agreeable. Much more agreeable than the edifying journals and whitewashed
                    church walls the clergymen are in love with. It was a sober, simple little room
                    she lived in, with a subdued, grey tone because of the plain wallpaper and yet
                    as warm as a painting by Chardin, a wooden floor with a mat and an old piece of
                    dark-red carpet, an ordinary kitchen stove, a chest of drawers, a large,
                    perfectly simple bed, in short, a real working woman’s interior. She had to do
                    the washing the next day. Just right, very good, I would have found her just as
                    charming in a purple jacket and a black skirt as now in a brown or red-grey
                    frock. And she was no longer young, perhaps the same age as K.V., and she had a
                    child, yes, life had given her a drubbing and her youth was gone. Gone? – there is
                    no such thing as an old woman. Ah, and she
                    was strong and healthy – and yet not rough, not common. Those who value
                    distinction so very highly, can they always tell what is distinguished? Heavens!
                    People sometimes look for it high and low when it’s close by, as I do too now
                    and then. I’m glad that I did what I did, because I think that nothing in
                    the world should keep me from my work or cause me to lose my good spirits. When I think of K.V., I still say ‘she and no other’, and I think
                    exactly the same as I did last summer about ‘meanwhile looking for another
                        lass’. But it’s not only recently that
                    I’ve grown fond of those women who are condemned and despised and cursed by
                    clergymen, my love for them is even somewhat older than my love for Kee Vos.
                    Whenever I walked down the street – often all alone and at loose ends, half sick
                    and destitute, with no money in my pocket – I looked at them and envied the
                    people who could go off with her, and I felt as though those poor girls were my
                    sisters, as far as our circumstances and experience of life were concerned. And,
                    you see, that feeling is old and deeply rooted in me. Even as a boy I sometimes
                    looked up with endless sympathy and respect into a half-withered female face on
                    which it was written, as it were: life and reality have given me a drubbing.    But my feelings
                    for K.V. are completely new and something entirely different. Without knowing
                    it, she’s in a kind of prison. She’s also poor and can’t do everything she
                    wants, and you see, she has a kind of resignation and I think that the
                    Jesuitisms of clergymen and devout ladies often make more of an impression on
                    her than on me, Jesuitisms that no longer impress me for the very reason that
                    I’ve learned a few tricks. But she adheres to them and couldn’t bear it if the
                    system of resignation and sin and God and whatnot appeared to be a conceit. And
                    I don’t think it occurs to her that perhaps God only
                    actually begins when we say those words with which Multatuli closes his prayer
                    of an unbeliever: ‘O God, there is no God’.
                    Look, I find the clergymen’s God as dead as a doornail. But does that make me an
                    atheist? The clergymen think me one – be that as it may – but look, I love, and
                    how could I feel love if I myself weren’t alive and others weren’t alive? And if
                    we live, there’s something wondrous about it. Call it God or human nature or
                    what you will, but there’s a certain something that I can’t define in a system,
                    even though it’s very much alive and real, and you see, for me it’s God or just
                    as good as God. Look, if I must die in due course in one way or another, fine,
                    what would there be to keep me alive? Wouldn’t it be the thought of love (moral
                    or immoral love, what do I know about it?). And heavens, I love Kee Vos for a
                    thousand reasons, but precisely because I believe in life and in something real
                    I no longer become distracted as I used to when I had thoughts about God and
                    religion that were more or less similar to those Kee Vos now appears to have. I
                    won’t give her up, but that inner crisis she’s perhaps going through will take
                    time, and I have the patience for it, and nothing she says or does makes me
                    angry. But as long as she goes on being attached to the past and clinging to it,
                    I must work and keep my mind clear for painting and drawing and business. So I
                    did what I did, from a need for warmth of life and with an eye to health. I’m
                    also telling you these things so that you don’t get the idea again that I’m in a
                    melancholy or distracted, pensive mood. On the contrary, I’m usually pottering
                    about with and thinking about paint, making watercolours, looking for a studio
                    &c. &c. Old chap, if only I could find a suitable studio.  0  Well, my letter has grown long, but anyway. I sometimes wish that the three months between now and going back
                    to M. were already over, but such as they’ll be, they’ll bring some good. Write
                    to me, though, now and then. Are you coming again in the winter? And listen, renting a studio &c., I’ll do it or I won’t,
                    depending on what Mauve thinks of it. I’m sending him the floor plan as agreed,
                    and perhaps he’ll come and have a look himself if necessary. But Pa has to stay
                    out of it. Pa isn’t the right man to get mixed up in artistic matters. And the
                    less I have to do with Pa in business matters, the better I’ll get along with
                    Pa. But I have to be free and independent in many things, that goes without
                    saying. I sometimes shudder at the thought of K.V., seeing her dwelling on
                    the past and clinging to old, dead notions. There’s something fatal about it,
                    and oh, she’d be none the worse for changing her mind. I think it quite possible
                    that her reaction will come, there’s so much in her that’s healthy and lively.
                    And so in March I’ll go to The Hague again and – and – again to Amsterdam. But
                    when I left Amsterdam this time, I said to myself, under no circumstances should
                    you become melancholy and let yourself be overwhelmed so that your work suffers,
                    especially now that it’s beginning to progress. Eating strawberries in the
                        spring, yes, that’s part of life, but
                    it’s only a short part of the year and it’s still a long way off. And you should envy me because of this or that? Oh no, old chap,
                    because what I’m seeking can be found by all, by you perhaps sooner than by me.
                    And oh, I’m so backward and narrow-minded about so many things, if only I knew
                    exactly why and what I should do to improve. But unfortunately we often don’t
                    see the beams in our own eye. Do write to me
                    soon, and you’ll just have to separate the wheat from the chaff in my letters,
                    if sometimes there’s something good in them, something true, so much the better,
                    but of course there’s much in them that’s wrong, more or less, or perhaps
                    exaggerated, without my always being aware of it. I’m truly no scholar and am so
                    extremely ignorant, oh, like many others and even more than others, but I can’t
                    gauge that myself, and I can gauge others even less than I can gauge myself, and
                    am often wide of the mark. But even as we stray we sometimes find the track
                    anyway, and there’s something good in all movement25 (by the way, I happened to hear Jules Breton say that
                    and have remembered that utterance of his). Tell me, have you ever heard Mauve
                    preach?? I’ve heard him imitate several clergymen – once he gave a sermon on
                    Peter’s barque26 (the sermon was divided into 3
                    parts: First, would he have bought it or inherited it? Second, would he have
                    paid for it in instalments or parts? Third, did he perhaps (banish the thought)
                    steal it?). Then he went on to preach on ‘the goodness of the Lord’27 and on ‘the Tigris and the Euphrates’28 and finally he did an imitation of J.P.S., how he had
                    married A. and Lecomte. But when I told him that I had once said in a conversation with Pa
                    that I believed that one could say something edifying even in church, even from
                    the pulpit, M. said, Yes. And then he did an imitation of Father
                        Bernhard:30 God – God – is almighty – he
                    created the sea, he created the earth and the sky and the stars and the sun and
                    the moon, he can do everything – everything – everything – and yet – no, He’s
                    not almighty, there’s one thing He cannot do. What is the one thing that God
                    Almighty cannot do? God Almighty cannot cast away a sinner. Well, adieu, Theo,
                    do write soon, in thought a handshake, believe me Ever yours, Vincent The Hague, Thursday evening My dear Theo, Accept my thanks for your letter and the enclosure. When I received your letter I was back in Etten, following Mauve’s advice, as I wrote to you. But now, as you see, I’m back in The Hague again. At Christmas I had a rather violent argument with Pa, and feelings ran so high that Pa said it would be better if I left home. Well, it was said so decidedly that I actually left the same day. Things actually came to a head because I didn’t go to church, and also said that if going to church was something forced and I had to go to church, I’d most certainly never go again, not even out of politeness, as I’ve been doing fairly regularly the whole time I’ve been in Etten. But oh, there’s actually much more to it, including the whole story of what happened this summer between me and K.V. I was angrier than I ever remember being in my whole life, and I told Pa plainly that I found the whole system of that religion loathsome, and precisely because I dwelled on those things too much during a miserable time in my life1 I don’t want anything more to do with it, and have to guard against it as against something fatal. Was I too angry, too violent? – so be it, but even supposing that to be the case, then at least now it’s over and done with. I went back to M. and said, listen M., I can’t stay in Etten and I have to go and live somewhere else, preferably here. Well, M. said, stay here then. And so I’ve rented a studio here, namely a room and alcove which can be made suitable. Inexpensive enough, just outside town in Schenkweg, about 10 minutes from M.
   Pa told me that if I needed money he would lend it to me if necessary, but now that’s impossible, I must remain completely independent of Pa. How? I don’t know yet, but M. is willing to help me if necessary, and you too, I hope and trust, and of course I’ll work and do my utmost to earn a little. I’m here now, and the fact is there’s no turning back. At an inconvenient time, but what’s to be done? I must have some simple furniture, and my expenses for drawing and painting materials aren’t getting any lower. I also have to try and dress better. It’s a daring move, and a question of sink or swim. But some day I’d have  set up house on my own, so what else can I do? Now things have gone faster than I expected. As far as the relations between Pa and Ma and me are concerned, they can’t be put to rights so very quickly. The difference in our mentality and outlook on life is simply too great. And although I spoke in anger, I said things that I also think when I’m in a calmer mood. So I don’t take back what I said, and anyway Pa has now heard it plainly. If I’d been calmer, I’d have said it in other, less extreme colours, but basically I’d have thought the same. And I hope that in any case it will lead to something good. I must endure bad times and the waters will rise, possibly as high as the lips and possibly even higher, how can I know beforehand? But I’ll fight my fight and sell my life dearly and try to win and pull through. 
   I’ll be moving into the studio around 1 January. Regarding furniture, I’ll take the very simplest, a wooden table, a couple of chairs. For a bed, I’d be content with a woollen blanket and the floor. But M. wants me to buy a bed and will lend me the money if necessary. When drawing up an account of the 100 francs, there turned out to be money left over, even though I made two journeys this summer, and once, the last time, for such a long time. It’s true that I ate and slept at home, but Pa himself said at the time that he could spare it. You understand that I’m now extremely worried, and foresee much toil and tribulation. But still it’s a relief to me that I’ve gone so far that I can no longer go back, and that even though the path is difficult, my path is now clear enough. It goes without saying that I’m asking you, Theo, if you can do it, to send me now and then what you can without going short yourself. And – in the circumstances, send it to me rather than giving it to others. Because if possible we shouldn’t get Mauve mixed up in this, as far as financial matters are concerned. It’s already of inestimable value that he helps me artistically in word and deed. He insists, however, that I buy a bed, for instance, and a couple of pieces of furniture, and says, I’ll lend it to you if necessary. Because according to him I must, no matter what, appear presentable as regards my clothing, and not try to scrimp and save. 
   I’ll write to you again soon. I don’t want to consider it a misfortune that it’s turned out this way, on the contrary, despite all the emotion I feel a certain calm. There is safety in the midst of danger. What would life be if we didn’t dare to take things in hand? I ran around everywhere to find that studio, both in the city and in Scheveningen. Scheveningen is terribly expensive. This studio costs only 7 guilders a month, but the furniture makes it difficult. Still, if one has one’s own things, they won’t disappear, and one has surer ground beneath one’s feet. The light comes from the south, more or less, but the window is large and high, and I have hopes that it will look nice after a time. You can imagine how stimulated I feel. What will my work be like in a year? If only I could express what I feel – well, Mauve understands all this and wants to give me as many technical tips as he can – what fills my head and heart must be expressed in drawings or paintings. Mauve himself is very busy with a large painting of a pink against the dunes being hauled by horses. I think it’s wonderful to be in The Hague, and I find no end of beautiful things and I must try and depict some of them. Adieu, old chap, accept a handshake in thought and write soon, believe me Ever yours, Vincent Many regards from M. and Jet. I still have a bit of money, but how long will I be able to get by on it? I have to stay at the boarding-house until 1 January. Just address your letters to the address A. Mauve. Uilebomen 198, since I go there almost every day. Dear brother, I’m just writing to wish you a happy New Year, may it be a good year for you in every way and, I add egoistically, for myself as well. Now as to me, it will perhaps not be disagreeable for you to learn that I’m installed in a studio of my own. A room and alcove, the light is bright enough, for the window is large (twice as large as an ordinary window), and it’s more or less facing south. I’ve bought furniture in true ‘village constable style’, as you call it, but I think that mine resembles it much more than yours, although it was you who coined the phrase. (I have real kitchen chairs, for example, and a really sturdy kitchen table.) Mauve lent me some money, 100 guilders, to rent it, furnish it and get the window and light fixed up. This is rather a worry, you’ll understand, but anyhow it’s the only sensible way, and in the long run it’s much less expensive having one’s own things than always spending money on yet another semi-furnished room. I’ve had a great deal of difficulty, what with finding it and then arranging the furniture in such a way that I could manage with what I had. 
   But now, old chap, I have a real studio of my own and am terribly pleased with it. I hadn’t dared hope that things would go this quickly, but now I think it superb and hope that you do too. Listen, you know it all, my expenses will be slightly higher than they were in Etten, but let’s put our shoulders to the wheel. M. gives me much hope that I’ll soon be earning something. And now that I’m in my own studio, it will most probably make a not unfavourable impression on some people who until now have thought that I’m merely dabbling, idling or loafing about. I hope that you’ll be able to send me something one of these days. If I needed something urgently and asked it of Mauve, he wouldn’t refuse me, but for the time being he’s really done enough. It happens to everyone at some point in life that he has to set himself up in his own house, and although at first I couldn’t face being in debt, I do feel that it’s better this way. 
   The plan is that I continue to work regularly from a model. That’s expensive, and yet it’s the cheapest way. De Bock ultimately disappoints me, there’s something spineless about him, and he gets angry if one says certain things to him that are actually only the ABCs. He has a feeling for landscape, he sometimes manages to imbue them with a kind of charm (including the large painting he’s now working on), but in himself there’s nothing to get hold of. He’s too vague and too insubstantial – cotton too finely woven. His paintings are a shadow of an impression, and in my opinion that impression is scarcely worth repeating so often. I won’t associate very much with the painters. I find Mauve more capable and more solid every day. And what more do I want? Theo, I’ll have to start dressing a bit better now, though. Now I know more or less the direction I must take, and can stand up for it openly, so I won’t avoid contact with people – also not follow them too much. M. and Jet send you their regards, adieu, I still have a lot to do, believe me Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, Tell me, Theo, how do I stand with you? Surely you’ve received my last letter, in which I told you one thing and another about what happened at home and how that resulted in my leaving home and going back to The Hague, and am now in my own studio, address SCHENKWEG No. 138 (near the Rijnspoor Station).  Mauve, you know, helped me to settle in, but I still have all kinds of expenses ahead of me, and I truly haven’t had a penny in my pocket for a day or two. Of course I’d really counted on your having sent at least the 100 francs for the month of January.
   But I haven’t received anything yet, not even a letter from you. The worst thing is that it’s impossible for me to work with a model before I have something in my pocket again, and so there’s almost nothing I can do, the weather is too bad to sit outdoors, although I’ve tried to repeatedly. I’m fine, but the last couple of days I’ve been weak from the tension. I’ve looked for models and know of a couple, but I can’t take them. Today I went to Goupil out of desperation, because in keeping with what 
   you wrote I wanted to ask Tersteeg to lend me some money for God’s sake. But Tersteeg had just left town for a couple of days. I don’t want to talk to Iterson about it. I must also bear up bravely towards Mauve. M. has really done enough already. Tersteeg had promised to come and have a look, but he hasn’t been here yet. 
   If for one reason or another you can’t send the 100 francs all at once, send me part of it by return of post. I just found a stamp in my pocket, otherwise I wouldn’t even have been able to send this letter. It’s a time of struggle for you and for me, but I believe we’re progressing. So let’s keep our spirits up, adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  You mustn’t think that I’m sending the letter back to insult you, but I find this the quickest way to answer it clearly. And if you didn’t have your letter back, you wouldn’t be able to understand what my answer refers to, whereas now the numbers guide you. I have no time, I’m waiting for a model today. 
   Because I have only a little time, I knew no better means of answering your letter than to answer one thing and another like this, point by point. (1) I didn’t ‘contrive’ to do it, on the contrary, when Pa was here, Mauve, Pa and I talked about my renting a studio in Etten – spending the winter there – coming back to The Hague in the spring. Because of the models and because I’d arranged to work there, and it was beginning to go well. All the same, I’d have liked to prolong my stay in The Hague a bit, since I was here anyway, but nonetheless I seriously intended continuing my studies of the Brabant peasant types. And when I was crossed in realizing that plan, after M. had been consulted and I had already written to him about the studio in question (a shed which needed some repairs), I couldn’t suppress my anger. Please remember one of my letters to you in which I wrote to you in broad terms about my plan to continue those studies. I mean the letter in which I asked you to say a few heartfelt words to impress upon Pa and Ma how important my work in Etten was to me &c. I remember the words I used: it really would be too bad if a whim of Pa were to make me give up work which is now progressing so well and which I’ve been working on for months. Think about it yourself – despite Mauve’s help, I’m in far more trouble here than at home, and I truly don’t know how I’ll get by. 2) That expression that I contrive to make Pa and Ma’s life miserable is actually not yours, I’ve known it for a long time as one of Pa’s Jesuitisms, and also told Pa and Ma that I considered it a Jesuitism and didn’t take the slightest notice of it. Pa regularly comes up with some such saying if someone says something to him that he doesn’t know how to answer, and says, among other things, ‘you’ll be the death of me’, while calmly reading the newspaper and smoking his pipe. So I take such expressions at their face value. 
   Or else Pa gets incredibly angry and is used to people being afraid, and it surprises Pa if people don’t give way to his anger. Pa is very easily hurt and irritable and full of obstinacies in domestic life and is used to getting his way. And the category ‘the conventions and rules of this house’, which I’m supposed to observe, includes literally everything that comes into Pa’s head. 3) ‘Fighting with an old man isn’t difficult &c.’ Because Pa is an old man I’ve spared him a hundred times, and tolerated things that are well-nigh intolerable. Well, this time it wasn’t fighting but simply saying ‘enough’, and because he wasn’t listening to reason and common sense I said it outright for once, and it’s very good indeed that Pa has finally heard one thing and another spoken plainly that others sometimes think as well. 4) That it won’t be put to rights quickly. For appearances’ sake I straightened things out by writing again to Pa to say that I’d rented a studio, that I also wished him a happy New Year, that I hoped that in that new year we should no longer fight in that way or in any other manner. I’m not doing any more about it, I don’t have to do any more about it. If this last scene were the only one of its kind, it would be different, but it was preceded by other scenes, when I’d said to Pa, in a calmer yet resolute way, many things that His Hon. systematically brushed aside one by one. So as regards those things I said in anger, I think the same things in a calmer mood, only then I refrain from saying them out of diplomacy or I say them in another way. But all diplomacy abandoned me when I got angry, and, well, now I’ve finally said it. I’m not asking for an apology, and as long as Pa and Ma take this attitude I won’t take any of it back. If, later on, they possibly become a bit more humane and sensitive and fair, then I’ll be glad to take it all back. But I doubt if that will happen. 5) That Pa and Ma can’t stand it if there’s bad blood &c. That’s true inasmuch as they create a desert around themselves and are making their old age miserable, even though it could be good and satisfying. But as to those expressions, ‘I can’t stand it’, ‘this will be the death of me’, ‘my life is a misery’, I no longer take any notice, because it’s only a mannerism. And if they don’t change, I fear, as I already said, that they’re in for many miserable and lonely days. 6) That I’ll regret it &c. Before things got as bad as they are now, I felt a great deal of remorse and sorrow, and tormented myself because things were going so badly between Pa and Ma and me. But now that it’s come to this, well, so be it, and to tell you the truth I’m no longer sorry but can’t help feeling relieved. If I realize later that I did the wrong thing, yes, then of course I’ll regret it, but I still don’t exactly see how it would have been possible to act otherwise. When someone tells me in no uncertain terms, ‘leave my house, the sooner the better, within the half-hour rather than the hour’, well, old chap, then I’m out in less than a quarter of an hour, and won’t come back again either. It really is too bad. For financial reasons, and so as not to cause you or anyone else any more trouble, I wouldn’t have left so easily of my own accord, you surely understand that, but now that they and not I said ‘go away’, well, the path I must take is clear enough. 
   7) As far as Mauve is concerned – yes of course I’m very fond of M., and sympathize with him, I like his work very much – and I consider myself fortunate to learn something from him, but I can’t shut myself up in a system or school any more than Mauve himself can, and in addition to Mauve and Mauve’s work, I also like others who are very different and work very differently. And as far as me and my own work are concerned, perhaps there’s a similarity sometimes, but certainly also a distinct difference. If I love someone or something, then I mean it, and there is definitely passion and fire sometimes, but that doesn’t mean that I systematically find only some people perfect and all the others worthless – God forbid. 8) Free-thinking: actually that’s a word I loathe, though I’m sometimes forced to use it for want of something better. 9) The thing is that I’m doing my best to think things through and try to take reason and common sense into account in what I do. And it would be totally inconsistent with that if one wanted to reduce someone to nothing. So it’s entirely true that I sometimes said to Pa ‘do consider this or that fully’, or ‘this or that doesn’t hold water in my opinion’, but that isn’t trying to reduce someone to nothing. And I’m not Pa’s enemy if I tell him the truth for once, not even when I said it angrily in salty language. Only it didn’t help me at all, and Pa took it badly. Does Pa mean that I said that the morality and religious system of the clergymen and academic notions aren’t worth tuppence to me since I’ve learned many of their tricks, then I certainly won’t take it back, because I really mean it. It’s only in a calm mood that I don’t talk about it, but it’s something else if one tries, for instance, to force me to go to church or to attach value to it, then of course I say it’s absolutely out of the question. 10) Does Pa’s life count for nothing? I already said that if I hear someone say ‘you’ll be the death of me’, and all the while that man is reading his newspaper and half a minute later starts talking about goodness knows what advertisement, then I find such an expression rather inappropriate and unnecessary and pay no attention to it. As soon as those words or suchlike are repeated to others, who then start to look upon me as something of a murderer or even a parricide, then I say, such calumnies are neither more nor less than Jesuitisms. So there you have it. Besides, now the murderer has left home and so, in a word, I take no notice of it, and I even think it ridiculous. 11) You say ‘I don’t understand you’. Well, that I certainly believe, because writing is actually an awful way to explain things to each other. And it takes a lot of time, and you and I have rather a lot to do. But we must have a bit of patience with one another until we see and speak to one another again. 
   12) Write to me again. Yes of course, but first I have to agree with you on how.  Do you want me to write in a sort of business style, dry and formal and picking and choosing my words and actually saying nothing? Or do you want me to go on writing just as I’ve been doing recently, telling you everything that pops into my head without being afraid to let fly, without mincing my words or holding back. I prefer to do the latter, namely write or say plainly what I mean. And now I’ll end my direct answer to your letter because I still have to speak to you about drawing &c., and I prefer to talk about that. Please bear with me if I pretend for the time being that Pa and Ma don’t exist, it would have been much better if I’d spent this winter in Etten, and it would have been much easier for me, particularly for financial reasons. If I were to think and fret about it, it would make me despondent, so that’s it, it’s over. Now I’m here and I have to manage somehow. If I were to write to Pa about it again, it would be adding fuel to the flames, and I don’t want to get so angry again, and I’m throwing myself with all my might into life and things here, what else can I do? Etten is lost and Het Heike, but I’ll try to regain something else instead. Now I thank you very much indeed for what you sent. I don’t need to tell you that I really have a great many worries besides. Naturally my expenses are more than in Etten and I can’t set to work with half as much energy as I should like and should be able to if I had more at my disposal. But my studio is turning out well. I wish you could see it, I’ve hung up all my studies, and you must send back the ones you have because they might prove useful to me. They may be unsaleable, and I myself acknowledge all their faults, but they contain something of nature because they were made with a certain passion. 
   And you know that I’m now struggling to make watercolours, and if I become adept at it they’ll become saleable. But Theo, you can be certain that when I first went to Mauve with my pen drawings and M. said, you should try it with charcoal and chalk and brush and stump, it was damned difficult for me to work with that new material. I was patient and it didn’t seem to help at all, and sometimes I grew so impatient that I trampled on my charcoal and was wholly and utterly discouraged. And yet, a while later I sent you drawings made with chalk and charcoal and the brush, and I went back to Mauve with a whole batch of such drawings which of course he criticized, and rightly so, and you too, but all the same I had taken a step forward. Now I’m going through a similar period of struggle and despondency, of patience and impatience, of hope and desolation. But I must plod on and anyway, after a while I’ll understand more about making watercolours. If it were that easy, one wouldn’t take any pleasure in it. And it’s exactly the same with painting. Moreover, the weather is bad, and this winter I haven’t yet gone out for pleasure. Still, I enjoy life and, in particular, having my own studio is too wonderful for words. When will you come and have coffee or tea with me? Soon I hope. You can stay here too, if necessary, that would be nice and companionable. And I even have flowers, and a couple of boxes of bulbs. And I’ve also acquired another ornament for my studio, I got a great bargain on some splendid woodcuts from The Graphic, some of them prints not of the clichés but of the blocks themselves. Just what I’ve been wanting for years. The drawings by Herkomer, Frank Holl, Walker, and others. I bought them from Blok, the Jewish bookseller, and chose the best from an enormous pile of Graphics and London News for five guilders. Some of them are superb, including the Houseless and homeless by Fildes
   (poor people waiting outside a night shelter)8 and two large Herkomers and many small ones, and the Irish emigrants by Frank Holl9 and the ‘Old gate’ by Walker. And especially a girls’ school by Frank Holl11 and also that large Herkomer, the invalids. In short, it’s exactly the stuff I need. And I have such beautiful things with a kind of restfulness in my house because, old chap, even though I’m still a long way from making them so beautifully myself, still, I have a couple of studies of old peasants and so on hanging on the wall that prove that my enthusiasm for those draughtsmen is not mere vanity, but that I’m struggling and striving to make something myself that is realistic and yet done with sentiment. I have around 12 figures of diggers and people working in the potato field, and I’m wondering if I couldn’t make something of them, you also have a couple of them, including a man putting potatoes in a sack. Anyway, I don’t know what yet, but whether it’s now or later, I must do it sometime, because I took a look at it this summer, and here in the dunes I could make a good study of the earth and the sky and then boldly put the figures in. Though I don’t value those studies so very much, and hope of course to make them very differently and better, but the Brabant types are distinctive, and who knows how they might be put to use. If there are some among them you’d like to keep, then by all means, but I’d very much like to have back those you don’t value. By studying new models I’ll automatically become alert to the mistakes in the proportion of my studies of this summer and, taking that into account, they can easily be of use to me. When your letter took so long to arrive (for because it went first to Mauve I got it even later), I had to go to Mr Tersteeg and he gave me 25 guilders to last until I received your letter. Perhaps it would be good if I, with your knowledge, or you, with my knowledge, were to settle a few things with Mr T. Because you understand, Theo, I must know as definitely as possible where I stand, and I have to work it out in advance, and know that I can or cannot do this or that. So you’ll be doing me a great favour by entering into a definite agreement, and I hope you’ll write to me about it soon. Mauve has promised to recommend me for an associate membership of Pulchri, because there I’d be able to draw from a model two evenings a week and would have more contact with artists. Later on I’ll become a regular member as soon as possible. Well, old chap, thanks for what you sent – and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, As I’ve often done, I sent you an answer in my last letter that was brief and to the point about one thing and another, yet in harsh words that nevertheless truly express what I think about things, but you mustn’t think that I’m always in a gruff, cold-hearted mood which Mauve would perhaps call a yellow soapa mood or saltwater mood. But even if I had written a yellow soap letter or a saltwater letter, surely that’s no worse than taking things too sentimentally. You say, ‘you’ll truly regret it some day’. Old chap, I believe that I’ve had many such regrets &c. before now. I saw it coming and tried to nip it in the bud, well that didn’t work, and anyway, what happened, happened. Will I now regret it? No, actually I don’t have time for regrets. Drawing is becoming more and more of a passion, and it’s just like a sailor’s passion for the sea. Mauve has now shown me a new way to make something, namely watercolours. Well, now I’m immersed in that, and I’m daubing and washing out, in short, seeking and striving. For one must make desperate attempts. Because there’s something diabolical about the execution of a watercolour.  Because there’s something good in all energetic movement. So although I was planning to write to you in even more detail about what happened at home, to try and explain how things stand from my point of view, even though I also wanted to tell you this and that about other subjects, I haven’t time for that now, and think it better to write to you again about drawing. 
   In addition to a couple of small watercolours, I’ve just started a large one, at least as large as one of those figure studies I made at Etten. Naturally it doesn’t automatically go well and easily straightaway. Mauve himself says that I’ll ruin at least 10 drawings or so before I know how to handle the brush a little. But it will lead to a brighter future, so I work on with as much cold-bloodedness as I can muster, and don’t let myself be deterred by my mistakes.  This is a little sketch of one of the small watercolours, it’s a corner of my studio with a girl grinding coffee. You see I’m looking for tone, a head or a hand that glows, with life in it, and that stands out against a drowsy background, twilit, and standing out boldly against that, that fragment of fireplace and stove, iron and brick, and a wooden floor. If I could get that drawing the way I’d like it, I’d make at least 3/4 of it in yellow soap style and 
   treat only that corner where the child is sitting delicately and tenderly and with sentiment. But you understand that I still can’t express all of that as I feel it, but it seems to me the point is simply to attack the difficulties, and the yellow soap passage still isn’t yellow soapy enough and the contrasting tenderness still not tender enough. But anyway, the sketch is still chucked on and its conception is clear, and to me it seems fairly good. Of course one can’t master the technique the first day.  This is the subject of the large drawing, but I’m doing it in a hurry and the sketch is terrible. Even so, perhaps it gives you an idea, and in any case it’s already on paper. I hear that someone called on me today, Mr Tersteeg, I think. I hope so, because he promised me he’d stop by, and I wanted to discuss some things with him. He’s supposed to be coming back tomorrow morning. Theo, I’m having a lot of trouble with the models, I search for them and when I find them it’s a struggle to get them to come to my studio, and sometimes they let me down. Like a smith’s boy this morning, who couldn’t come because his father said that I had to pay a guilder an hour, and of course I wasn’t inclined to do that. Tomorrow I have the little old woman as a model again, but she couldn’t come for 3 days running. Well then, when I go out, I quite often go to sketch in the soup kitchen or the 3rd-class waiting room4 or such places. But it’s so damned cold outdoors, especially for me, since I don’t yet draw as fast as more practised draughtsmen, and actually have to work my drawings out in more detail for them to be of any use to me. 
   So you see I’m not standing still and am no longer dwelling on Etten, but am trying to put down roots here. Naturally the models cost me money, and I must tell you that I buy what’s necessary for myself, though the cheapest possible. (I go to the soup kitchen to eat.) And yet I trust you won’t have any objections to my continuing. But I repeat what I said in my last letter: let me know as precisely as possible where I stand, and I think it would be fine if you could come to an agreement with Mr Tersteeg, so that in case of difficulty I can go to him without too many misgivings. For my part I promise you that I’ll work as much as I can, though things like models often depend on the money I do or don’t have in my pocket, whether I can set to work at full speed, half speed or sometimes not at all. Now, for instance, I’m negotiating with a mother with a little child, though I’m afraid it will turn out to be too expensive for me. Be assured that I’d prefer to go full speed but... anyway, you understand it all, I have to restrain myself until I have more resources and freedom. Write to me again soon, and listen, send the money as soon as possible in February, because I’m sure I won’t have a penny by then. I’m planning to go on making small pen drawings whenever possible, but different from the large ones I made this summer. A bit sharper and a bit angrier. This is a sketch  of Schenkweg, the view from my window. Well, adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Now that the week is over I’m writing to you again. I’ve had a model every day on a regular basis, from morning to evening, and the model is good. Mauve came to have a look, and Mr Tersteeg too, and I’m glad about that. I’ve been working all this time with watercolour only, and it’s giving me more pleasure every day. How much I’d like you to be here, I’d have so much to tell and to ask you. Will you come again in the spring? Won’t you know a little in advance? Now, what I’ve made still isn’t good and is far from being so, but it’s again something different and it’s somewhat stronger and livelier in colour, and without body-colour. Now I hope that you’ll write to me again soon, and that we’ll definitely try to reach an agreement about the money. Because although I’d be able to get by on 100 francs a month on my own, it’s a very different matter when I also have to pay and feed my model every day &c. &c. And then the cost of paint, paper &c. I already told you in my last letter that this is what determines whether I can work at full speed or half speed. 
   And now that I’m here, all kinds of little expenses crop up every day, and they don’t make life any easier. Well, for a while I carried on steadily nevertheless, but now I have no money. It’s natural that when one sets up house somewhere there are all kinds of expenses. But what I win by it is that I feel I’m progressing, and I’ll master the art of watercolour, and it needn’t even take very long before my work is saleable. Mr Tersteeg himself said something about it, and when I succeed in a small format then I think he’ll buy something. And I’ve worked more on that drawing of that little old woman I sent you a sketch of, and one day it will be sold. Believe me, I work, I struggle, I swot the whole day, and with pleasure, too, but as it is now I’d also become very discouraged if I couldn’t go on working just as hard or even harder. 
   If you write to Mr Tersteeg about it, he’ll gladly give you credit for an amount you set yourself, and if he wants to he can check and see what I spend it on if he or you don’t trust me. But it would be terrible not to go on working as I have been the last three weeks or so. With regard to the size of the drawings or the subjects, I’ll gladly listen to what Mr T. or Mauve has to say about it. I’ve been working on several large ones recently, because no matter what, I must get over that dry manner in which my studies of this summer were done. And Mauve actually said yesterday evening, although he naturally had some criticism as well, ‘it’s beginning to look like a watercolour’. Well, if I gain that much, then I reckon I’m squandering neither time nor money. And now that I’ve tried out the handling of the brush and the power of colours in a larger format, I can attempt smaller ones again. As a matter of fact, I have two small ones started, but because I was wrestling with them and sponged part of them out, I started on a really large one. Of which I’m sending you a sketch. It surprises me a little that you haven’t written to me again, because you’ve written to me only once since I’ve been here, and then only briefly. 
    
   And yet it’s very necessary that you write to me soon. Mauve was just4 here again and I at his place too, he again had this and that to tell me. And Mr Tersteeg was also here and talked about my starting a couple of drawings in a smaller format. Well, so for the coming week, which starts tomorrow, I have work enough but not money enough, I fear, because all I have left is 2. guilders and a couple of cents. What should I do now? If I were to go to Mauve or Mr Tersteeg and ask them, I don’t think they’d refuse me. But Mauve has done so much already, and I’d rather sell Mr Tersteeg a couple of small drawings, if they succeed, than ask him to lend me money. At least as long as there’s no definite agreement as to where I stand. So answer me soon and, if you will, do either one or the other: send me something to keep me going or write about it to Mr Tersteeg. Theo, I feel an energy in 
   me and I’m doing what I can to release it and set it free. I have trouble enough struggling and wrestling with my drawings, and if this were compounded by dreadful worries and I couldn’t keep the models, then I wouldn’t know what to do. It’s awful that you have to pay for it all, but we aren’t as alone as we were last winter, for example. I now feel that I’m on a better path to get results. I’ll do what I can, I’ll work hard and, as soon as I’ve mastered the brush, even harder than I’m now able to. And if we press on with vigour and energy, it won’t be long before you no longer have to send me anything. Well, old chap, keep on doing what you can and I’ll also do what I can. Adieu, I’m counting on your writing soon, you don’t have to send a lot all at once, if only I can go on from week to week. Accept a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent Sunday evening. Schenkweg 138 (near the Rijnspoor) My dear Theo, I may have written to you only yesterday, but I’m writing again even so. For although I still have some measure of courage, it’s sometimes difficult for me always to bear up bravely in the presence of Mauve and Tersteeg and others. And I must do so, for even though I don’t pretend to be without worries, still, I don’t have to tell them all their details and depths. But it happens often enough that I’m at my wits’ end. This morning I felt so miserable that I took to my bed, I had a headache and was feverish from nervous exhaustion, because I dread this week so much and don’t know how I’ll manage. And then I got up again and went to bed again and now it’s subsided, but I wanted to tell you that I didn’t exaggerate in yesterday’s letter. If I only go on working hard, it won’t be long before I’ll be earning something with my work, but until then I’ve got terrible worries. 
   Then, too, I have relatively few drawing materials, or otherwise inadequate ones. Well, I have my box and easel and brushes, enough in fact for the time being, but this week, for instance, my drawing board warped, becoming as curved as a barrel, because it was too thin, and my easel was also damaged during shipment here, which is bothersome enough. In short, there are heaps of things I still have to get or replace, and naturally it needn’t be all at once, but it means that nearly every day little things are necessary which, taken altogether, worry me greatly. Sometimes my clothes need things done to them, regarding which Mauve has already told me a thing or two, which I’ll certainly do, though not all of it can be done at once. You know that my clothes are mostly altered things of yours, and a couple of poor-quality fabric which were bought ready-made. So they look shabby, and especially all that messing about with paint makes it much more difficult even to keep them wearable. 
   With boots it’s exactly the same. My underclothes are also starting to wear out, some of them are still all right, but some are in tatters and don’t fit me. You know of course that for a long time I’ve been short of money, and then lots of things fall apart. And then it sometimes happens that one can’t help being terribly depressed at times, even if only briefly, just when one is in good spirits, as I actually have been these days and still am even. And that’s how it was this morning, it was one of those unfortunate hours when one is powerless and weak with nervous exhaustion. I believe it was actually caused by my having arranged with Mauve to do things with the model and outdoors, and then I suddenly thought... perhaps I can’t do it because I won’t have a penny in two days’ time and then M. will think that I haven’t done it through cowardice. And so I got up again to write to you again because I had no peace of mind. And it hinders me so much in my work if I have too many other things on my mind that I don’t want to think about, and 
   am in a stew while sitting in front of the model about how I’m going to pay and whether I’ll continue the next day or won’t be able to. And I must, I must be able to stay composed and calm when at work, it really is hard enough as it is. And now, especially, I must keep my wits about me, but this morning I felt so clearly that my strength was beginning to ebb, not my desire or my courage, and that’s why I’m telling you this again. I thoroughly understand that you might also be having a hard time of it, but it seems to me that an agreement could be made with Tersteeg if necessary so that everything would be settled. Now that I can draw from the model at Pulchri two evenings a week, if it’s necessary 4 days of model should be enough from now on, and now that I’ve found that little old woman, it needn’t be so expensive as it was those first few days when I was bargaining with this one or that one, for I’ve already had a number of models, but they’re too expensive or they think it too far to come, or they complain later and can’t come back regularly. But I think I’ve done well to find this woman. Yesterday I had a lesson from Mauve on drawing hands and faces, on keeping the paint layer thin. Mauve knows it all so well, and when he says something, he makes an effort and doesn’t just say something for the sake of saying it, well, I also make an effort to listen and take pains to put it into practice. Yesterday I again told Mauve that it was so necessary for me to earn something on the side, but I don’t want to ask him for money because he gives me something that’s much better than money, and besides, he helped me to buy my furniture and that’s more than enough. Now that I’ve written to you, I’ll set to work again tomorrow in good faith. When you were in Etten this summer2 you talked about wanting me to start working in watercolour. At the time I saw no way to do it and didn’t know how to set about it. Now it’s beginning to dawn on me, and in spite of everything, the sun is rising. Well, adieu Theo, accept a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Schenkweg 138 Thursday. My dear Theo, I received your letter and the 100 francs enclosed in good order, and thank you very much for both. What I feared would happen when last I wrote to you has now truly come about, namely that I fell ill and spent three days or so lying in bed with fever and anxiety. Accompanied now and then by headache and toothache. It’s a wretched condition and comes from nervous exhaustion. Mauve came to see me and we agreed again to bear up bravely through it all. But then I loathe myself so much for not being able to do what I’d like, and at such moments one feels as though one is bound hand and foot, lying in a deep, dark pit, powerless to do anything. Now it’s over, inasmuch as I got up last night and pottered around a bit, putting one thing and another in order, and when this morning the model came of her own accord to have a look, even though I only half expected her, together with Mauve I arranged her in a pose and tried to draw a little, but I can’t yet, and this evening I felt completely weak and miserable. But if I do as little as possible for a couple of days then it will be over for a good long time, and if I’m careful I needn’t be afraid that it will recur for the time being. I’m very sorry that you’re not well either. When I was in Brussels last winter, I had baths as often as I could, 2 or 3 times a week in the bathhouse, and I felt very well and shall start doing it again here. I don’t doubt but that it would also help you a lot if you were to keep it up for a while, because one gets what they call ‘radiation’ here, namely that the pores of the skin stay open and the skin can breathe, whereas otherwise it shrivels up a bit, especially in the winter. And I tell you frankly that I definitely think you mustn’t be embarrassed about going to a girl now and then, if you know one you can trust and you can feel something for, of which there are many in fact. Because for someone whose life is all hard work and exertion it’s necessary, absolutely necessary, to stay normal and to keep one’s wits about one. One doesn’t have to overdo that kind of thing and go to excess, but nature has fixed laws and it’s fatal to struggle against them. Anyway, you know everything you need to know about it. 
   It would be good for you, it would be good for me, if we were married, but what can one do? I’m sending you a little drawing, but you mustn’t conclude from it that they’re all like that, this is fairly thin and washed quickly, but that doesn’t always work, especially with larger ones, in fact it seldom does. Yet it will perhaps prove to you that it’s not a hopeless case, that I’m beginning to get the hang of it, rather. When Mauve was last here he asked me if I needed any money. I could put on a brave face towards him and that’s going better, but you see that in an emergency he would also do something. And so, although there will still be worries, I do have hope that we’ll muddle through. Especially if Mr Tersteeg would be kind enough, if it’s inconvenient for you, to give me some credit if it should prove absolutely necessary. You speak of fine promises. It’s more or less the same with me. Mauve says it will go well, but that doesn’t alter the fact that the watercolours I’m making still aren’t exactly saleable. Well, I also have hope and I’ll work myself to the bone, but one is sometimes driven to desperation when one wants to work something up a bit more and it turns out thick. It’s enough to drive one to distraction, for it’s no small difficulty. And experiments and trials with watercolours are rather costly. Paper, paint, brushes and the model and time and all the rest. Still, I believe that the least expensive way is to persevere without losing any time. For one must get through this miserable period. 
   Now I must learn not to do some things which I more or less taught myself, and to look at things in a completely different way. A great effort must be made before one can look at the proportion of things with a steady eye. It’s not exactly easy for me to get along with Mauve all the time, any more than is the reverse, because I think we’re a match for each other as regards nervous energy, and it’s a downright effort for him to give me directions, and no less for me to understand them and to attempt to put them into practice. But I think we’re beginning to understand each other quite well, and it’s already beginning to be a deeper feeling than mere superficial sympathy. He has his hands full with his large painting that was once intended for the Salon, it will be splendid. And he’s also working on a winter scene. And some lovely drawings. I believe he puts a little bit of his life into each painting and each drawing. Sometimes he’s dog-tired, and he said recently, ‘I’m not getting any stronger’, and anyone seeing him just then wouldn’t easily forget the expression on his face. This is what Mauve  says to console me when my drawings turn out heavy, thick, muddy, black, dead: If you were already working thinly now, it would only be being stylish and later your work would probably become thick. Now, though, you’re struggling and it becomes heavy, but later it will become quick and thin. If indeed it turns out like that, I have nothing against it. And you see it now from this small one, which took a quarter of an hour to make from beginning to end, but – after I’d made a larger one that turned out too heavy. And it was precisely because I’d struggled with that other one that, when the model happened to be standing like this for a moment, I was later able to sketch this one in an instant on a little piece of paper that was left over from a sheet of Whatman. This model is a pretty girl, I believe she’s mainly Artz’s model, but she charges a daalder8 a day and that’s really too expensive for now. So I simply toil on with my old crone. 
   The success or failure of a drawing also has a lot to do with one’s mood and condition, I believe. And that’s why I do what I can to stay clear-headed and cheerful. But sometimes, like now, some malaise or other takes hold of me, and then it doesn’t work at all. But then, too, the message is to keep on working – because Mauve, for instance, and Israëls and so many others who are examples know how to benefit from every mood. Anyway, I have some hope that as soon as I’m completely better things will go well, a little better than now. If I have to rest for a while I’ll do it, but it will probably be over soon. All things considered, though, I’m not like I was a year or so ago, when I never had to stay in bed for a day, and now there’s something thwarting me at every turn, even if it isn’t so bad. In short, my youth is past, not my love of life or my vitality, but I mean the time when one doesn’t feel that one lives, and lives without effort. Actually I say all the better, there are now better things, after all, than there were then. Bear up, old chap – it really is rather petty and mean of Messrs G&Cie that they refused you when you wanted to have some money. You certainly didn’t deserve that, that they were so cold-hearted towards you, because you do a lot of their dirty work and don’t spare yourself. So you have a right to be treated with some respect. Accept a handshake in thought, I hope that I’ll soon have something better to tell you than I did today and recently, but you mustn’t hold it against me, I’m very weak. Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent  13 Feb. 82 My dear Theo, Even though I’m rather expecting a letter from you one of these days, I’ll write again anyway. I heard a few things about you from Mr Tersteeg when he returned from Paris. He told me that you were doing well, and he seemed to be rather pleased with his trip. When I went to see him I had a couple of drawings, and he said that they were better than the last ones and told me that I should again make a couple of small ones. I’m working on those now. And I’ve also been working on a new pen drawing of an old woman knitting. And I believe it’s better than last summer’s, at least it has more tone. When I have a couple of pen drawings that have turned out quite well, I believe I know an art lover who will take them. I also wrote to C.M. the other day to say I’d rented a studio here, and hoped that when he came to The Hague he’d let me know, or come and have a look. Uncle Cent also told me last summer that if I have a drawing, a little smaller than those of last summer2 and with more watercolour, I should simply send it and he would take it. Perhaps the time will soon come when my work will put some money in my pocket, which I’m badly in need of, precisely in order to tackle things more seriously.
   If you can find out about it, you must tell me what kind of drawings one might be able to sell to the illustrated magazines. It seems to me they could use pen drawings of types of the people, and I’d like so much to start working on them, in order to make something suitable for reproduction. I don’t think that all drawings are drawn directly on the blocks, there must be some means of getting a facsimile onto the block. Though I don’t rightly know. Sometimes I long so very much to see you and talk to you, will it be a long time before you come to Holland? I believe Pa half expected you to come for his birthday. I was very glad that Mr Tersteeg found the drawings a little better, well, I’m also beginning to feel more at home with my model, and that’s precisely the reason why I must continue with her now. In the last two studies I captured the character much better, everyone who saw them said so. At the moment I quite often go to draw with Breitner, a young painter who’s acquainted with Rochussen as I am with Mauve. He draws very skilfully and very differently from me, and we often draw types together in the soup kitchen or the waiting room &c. He sometimes comes to my studio to look at woodcuts, and I go to see the ones he has as well. He has the studio that Apol used to have at Siebenhaar’s.
   Last week I went to an art viewing at Pulchri which had sketches by Bosboom and Henkes. Very beautiful; there were a number of drawings by Henkes, larger figures than one usually sees from him. He ought to make more of them, I think. Weissenbruch also came to see me. I look forward every day to a letter from you, because I hope you’ll send me something one of these days. We must stick it out for a while, old chap, and persevere, you as well as I, and then we’ll both get pleasure from it sometime. I’m really very glad that I’ve gone on with the figure so far. If I’d been making only landscapes, perhaps I’d already be making something that would fetch a price, but later on I’d end up getting stuck anyway. Although the figure is more difficult and a more complicated matter, I believe it’s more solid in the long run. De Bock came here this afternoon just as I was working from the model, and when he saw the model he started saying that he’d quite like to draw figures too; all the same, he doesn’t do it. He recently made a beautiful drawing, though.
   In your last letter you told me something about the matter of your not being able to have any money before the inventory was finished. But if you don’t have it, be so good as to write to Mr Tersteeg about it immediately, because I have only three guilders or so left and it’s already nearly the middle of February. So at all events I’m expecting a letter from you any day now. I believe that I’ve got the proportions much better in my last drawings than in the previous ones, and that’s exactly what seemed to me to be the worst fault in my drawings up to now, but that’s changing, thank God, and then I won’t be afraid of anything. Adieu Theo, write soon, accept in thought a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, It’s now 18 February and I still haven’t heard anything from you this month. Because you wrote something in your last letter about not feeling well, I thought you might perhaps be ill. But Mr Tersteeg told me you’d recovered, at least he hadn’t noticed anything wrong with you. You understand that I’m extremely short of money. Mr Tersteeg bought a little drawing from me for 10 guilders, which helped me to get through the week. But he wants them small and only in watercolour and I can’t do that yet. One milestone has been passed, however. I work as hard as I can, but don’t forget that I’ll go under if I have too much worry and strain. So write by return of post if you can, send me something, and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
   This week, in addition to the one Mr Tersteeg bought, I’ve made around 3 studies that are still not right in execution, though the drawing is better, thank goodness. It means a great deal to me to feel that I’m beginning to draw better, and that keeps my spirits up. Drawing is the most important thing, no matter what they say, and far and away the most difficult as well. This is why I dare to say that I’ll make something saleable within the year. Because I don’t count the one Mr Tersteeg bought, I’ll be much better at it when I’ve improved my drawing so that it no longer causes me such trouble. Adieu, old chap, be sure to write soon! Saturday. My dear Theo, I received your last letter with the 100 francs enclosed in good order, and I sincerely thank you for sending it. I’d have sent you news of its safe receipt immediately, but I’ve been very busy with a couple of drawings for which I had a model. For I’ll have you know that if you’re busy, so am I, and will be so more and more, because I’m getting more of an eye for my work, and so can tear myself away from it only with a great effort in order to write or to go and visit someone if necessary. What made me happy was that you write that you may be coming to Holland soon. When you’ve seen what I’ve been doing recently, perhaps we’ll have a better idea of the future. When you come, I hope we’ll have some quiet time together in the studio, and I also hope that you’ll write to me in advance, so that I can arrange with the model not to come during the days of your visit.
   You write about Pa’s birthday, I must say that I feel so good to have done with everything, it’s such a tranquillity, which I need so much in my work, my head can’t hold more than it does. And now I dread starting up a new correspondence, so much so that I’m quietly leaving things as they are for the present. When I was still at home I worried about it, but now that things have come to this, what can one do? Ignore everything and pretend that nothing happened – Pa and Ma might be able to do that, but I can’t – I feel that, sadly, something did in fact happen. When I think of Etten, a kind of shiver runs down my body as though I were in a church. In short, what can be done, and again, what can be done? Besides, you mustn’t blame me, Theo, or think that I’m carping, but you wrote something to me which you perhaps thought would make me happy, but it didn’t make me happy. You said that that small watercolour3 is the best thing of mine you’ve seen – well, that isn’t true, because those studies of mine you have are much better, and the pen drawings of last summer are also better, because that little drawing means nothing; anyhow, I only sent it to you to show that my working with watercolour at some point wasn’t an impossibility. 
   But there’s much more serious study and more substance in those other things, despite the fact that they still look yellow-soap-like. And if I had something against Mr Tersteeg (but I don’t have anything against him), then it would be the same thing. Namely that he encourages me not to undertake difficult study from a model but rather to adopt a procedure that’s actually only half suited to the rendering of what I want to express, according to my own character and according to my own temperament. It goes without saying that I’d be very happy to sell a drawing, but it makes me much happier if a true artist like Weissenbruch says of an unsaleable (???) study or drawing, that’s faithful and I’d be able to work from that. You see, although I place great value on money, especially now, still, for me the No. 1 thing is to make something that’s reasonable. Well, something like what Weissenbruch said of a landscape, a peat moor, Mauve said it of a figure, namely an old peasant sitting by the fireplace, thinking or daydreaming, as though seeing things from the distant past taking shape in the glow of the fire or the smoke. It may take a longer or shorter time, but the way is really to penetrate deeply into nature. To be true is what remains, says Gavarni. One may be caught up for a time in petty pecuniary vexations, but one will surmount them, and the drawings that were rejected earlier will then be sold.
   I’ve written to C.M. to tell him that I’d taken a studio here, and he wrote back saying that he expected to be coming to The Hague soon and would come and visit me. Recently I was also given regards from my old friend Wisselingh from London, who’s also supposed to come, and he was glad that I was working. Well, I hope you’ll succeed in escaping, because I’m longing to see you. I think that when you’ve seen my recent studies you’ll agree completely with my taking a model regularly. The better I get to know the models, the better I can draw them, of course. And I’ve been rather lucky in finding models. Today, now as I’m writing to you, I have a child that has to rest once in a while for half an hour, and I’m using that half-hour for this letter. Thanks again for what you sent, and a handshake in thought, adieu, Ever yours, Vincent P.S. I’ve made two studies of the child today. It’s getting dark now. Good-night. Friday, 3 March My dear Theo, Since receiving your letter and the money1 I’ve taken a model every day and I’m up to my ears in work. It’s a new model I have, although I’d drawn her before superficially. Or rather it’s more than one model, because I’ve already had 3 people from the same family, a woman of about 45 who’s just like a figure by E. Frère, and her daughter, 30 or so, and a younger child of 10 or 12. They’re poor people and, I must say, invaluably willing. I got them to pose for me, though not without difficulty and on the condition that I’d promise them steady work. Well, that was exactly what I wanted so very much, and I consider it a good arrangement. The younger woman doesn’t have a pretty face because she had smallpox, but her figure is very graceful and I find it charming. They also have good clothes. Black woollens3 and nicely shaped caps, and a pretty shawl &c. You needn’t worry too much about the money, because we’ve agreed to compromise in the beginning. I’ve promised them a guilder a day as soon as I sell one. 
   And that I’ll make it up to them later for giving them too little now. But I must manage to sell something. If I could do so, I’d keep everything I’m now making of them for myself, because if I only kept them for a year I’m sure I could get more for them then than now. But anyway, in the circumstances, it would be very nice if Mr Tersteeg bought a thing or two now and then, if necessary on the condition that he can exchange them if they don’t sell. Mr Tersteeg promised to come and see me as soon as he can find the time. The reason I’d like to keep them is simply this: when I draw individual figures it’s always with an eye to making a composition with a number of figures, for instance, a 3rd-class waiting room or a pawnshop or an interior. But those larger compositions must ripen gradually, and for a drawing with 3 seamstresses, for example, one must draw at least 90 seamstresses. That’s how it works. I had a friendly letter from C.M. promising to come to The Hague soon and to visit me too. Well, that’s just a promise, yet again, but perhaps something after all. Oh well.
   For the rest I’ll run after people less and less as time goes on, whoever they may be, neither art dealers nor painters, the only ones I’ll run after are models, because I find working without a model totally wrong, at least as far as I’m concerned. I say, Theo, it really is nice to see a tiny bit of light, and I do see a bit of light. It’s nice to draw a person, something that lives, it’s damned difficult but wonderful anyhow. Tomorrow two children are coming to visit whom I must amuse and draw at the same time. I want some life in my studio, and already have all kinds of acquaintances in the neighbourhood. On Sunday an orphan boy is coming, a perfect type, but unfortunately I can have him only for a short time. Perhaps it’s true that I don’t have the ability to mix with people who are keen on etiquette, but on the other hand I perhaps have more feeling for poor or simple folk, and if I lose on the one hand I win on the other hand, and sometimes I simply give up and think, after all it’s right and reasonable that I, as an artist, live in what I feel and try to express. Evil be to him who evil thinks. Now it’s the beginning of the month again. Even though it hasn’t been a full month since you sent me something, all the same, I’d like to ask you kindly to send me something if you can one of these days. 
   It needn’t be the 100 francs all at once, just as long as it’s something to be getting along with between now and the time when you can send something. I say this because in a previous letter you mentioned that you couldn’t get any money until the inventory had been finished. Sometimes it grieves me to think that I might have to let the model wait, because they need it so much. I’ve paid them up to today, but next week I wouldn’t be able to do it. But I can in fact have the model, be it the older woman or the younger or the child. By the way, Breitner spoke to me about you recently, that there was something he very much regretted, for which he thought you might still be angry at him. For he still has a drawing that belongs to you, I believe, though I didn’t rightly understand the matter. He’s working on a large thing, a market scene which must accommodate a lot of figures. Yesterday evening I went out with him to look for figure types in the street in order to study them later in the studio with a model. In that way I drew an old woman I’d seen in the Geest district where the madhouse is – like this:6  Well, good evening, I hope to hear something from you soon. Ever yours, Vincent I also had to pay the rent this week. Good-night. It’s already two o’clock and I’m not finished yet. My dear Theo, In your letter of 18 February you said: ‘When Tersteeg was here we naturally spoke about you, and he told me that whenever you needed anything you could feel easy about going to him’ &c. But why, then, when I asked Tersteeg for 10 guilders the other day, did he give it to me with so many reproaches, and I’d almost say insults, that I almost couldn’t restrain myself, though I did restrain myself. I’d have thrown the 10 guilders in his face if it had been for me, but I had to pay the model, who’s a poor, sick woman whom I may not keep waiting. So I kept quiet. However, for half a year I won’t go to Tersteeg any more or talk to him or show him my work. I’m not telling him that, but I’m saying it to you. My dear Theo, you say ‘be sure and stay good friends with T., for he’s almost like an elder brother to us’. But my dear fellow, he may be friendly to you, but for years I’ve been confronted with his unfriendly and hard side.
   He would be right in reproaching me if I didn’t work, but it’s disgraceful to upbraid someone who works hard and constantly at difficult, painstaking work with such rebukes as ‘I’m absolutely certain that you’re no artist’, ‘for me it counts heavily against you that you started too late’, ‘you have to earn your bread’. Then I say, stop! Easy does it. One can’t always be friends, one must also quarrel occasionally. As regards the arrangement between you and me, that I receive money from you, I’d like to speak to you about it again in the presence of Mauve and no one else, when you come to The Hague, which will be soon, I hope. Mauve’s large painting will be finished soon, and then Mauve will again have a thing or two to say to me about making watercolours. 
   But Tersteeg really cannot talk so that one can work from it. The summary of what Mauve has said to me so far is: Vincent, when you draw you’re a painter. And that’s why I’ve worked, and worked hard, for weeks now, on drawing, on proportion, on perspective, but Tersteeg doesn’t appreciate that enough, and merely talks about ‘saleability’. For this I don’t deserve his reproaches – though I’m inclined to restrain myself because I do respect His Hon., and he can’t stand being contradicted. That’s why I say, in half a year we’ll speak to each other again – for half a year we won’t speak to each other. If you can, send me the money for this month soon. I’m progressing with my work, but I can’t work without money, or with too little. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’d prefer to have no midday meal for half a year and save money like that than receive 10 guilders now and then from Tersteeg, along with his reproaches. I’d like to know what the painters would say to his argument ‘take fewer models to economize’ at the very moment when, after much hunting, one has found models who aren’t too expensive. Working without a model is the bane of the figure painter, especially at the beginning of his career.  If Tersteeg told you he was surprised at some of the things I’d said to His Hon., then perhaps he’ll also be surprised at this, but I wish that he’d consider whether he doesn’t sometimes go a bit too far. Last winter I asked him to speak to Mauve about me. He also treated that very high-handedly and wrote to me ‘that certainly won’t be possible’. Yet it was possible, as it later turned out, and so Tersteeg isn’t always right. And if T. hadn’t said that so decidedly last winter, perhaps I’d have become acquainted with Mauve sooner. My dear Theo, This morning when I wrote to you1 I was in two minds about something that has been a great source of worry to me, though for the moment my mind is at rest on that score. I have a bit of bad news to tell you, namely that Mauve is in fact very ill again – the usual, of course. But there’s also a bit of good news: I can rest assured that it’s due to his illness that he’s been so unfriendly to me recently, and not because my work was going in the wrong direction. I already wrote to you in a previous letter that I’d had a visit from Weissenbruch. At the moment Weissenbruch is practically the only one who’s allowed to see Mauve, and I thought I should go and talk with him. So I went today to his studio in the attic you’re familiar with. And as soon as he saw me he began to laugh, and said, you’ve surely come to hear about Mauve, so he knew instantly why I’d come and I didn’t have to give him an explanation. He then told me that the cause of his visit to me had actually been Mauve, who was doubtful about me and had sent him to see me to have Weissenbruch’s opinion about my work. 
   And Weissenbruch then said to Mauve, ‘he draws damned well, I’d be able to work from his studies’. And, he added, they call me the merciless sword and that I certainly am, and I wouldn’t have said that to Mauve if I’d found nothing good in your studies. I now have permission, so long as Mauve is ill or too busy with his large painting, to go to Weissenbruch if I need to know something, and W. told me that in no way should I be worried about the change in M.’s mood. I also asked W. what he thought of my pen drawings. Those are your best, he said. And I told him that Tersteeg had criticized them. Take no notice of it, he said, when Mauve said there was a painter in you, Tersteeg said no, and Mauve took your side against Tersteeg, and I was there, and if it happens again, I too will take your side, now that I’ve seen your work. 
   That ‘taking sides’ isn't what I want, though I must say that it’s sometimes unbearable to have Tersteeg forever saying to me ‘you should start thinking about earning your bread’. I find that such a loathsome expression that I have trouble keeping my temper. I work as hard as I can and don’t spare myself, so I’m worth my bread, and people shouldn’t reproach me if I haven’t yet been able to sell anything. You now have these particulars because I can’t understand why you’ve neither written nor sent anything this month. I think it possible that you may have heard something from Tersteeg that puzzled you again. Rest assured, yet again, that I’m trying to make headway with things that are easier to sell, namely watercolours, but it can’t happen overnight. If I gradually succeed then it will have been quickly, considering the short time I’ve been working at it. But I won’t succeed at it instantly. As soon as Mauve is better and comes to see me again or I go to him, he’ll again tell me 
   useful things about the studies I’ve made in the meantime. I’ve had very little help from Mauve recently, and he once said: I don’t always feel like showing you. Sometimes I’m so tired, and then, for God’s sake, you’ll just have to wait for a more opportune moment. I consider it a great privilege to visit such clever people as W. once in a while, especially when they take the trouble – as W. did this morning, for instance – to take a drawing they’re working on but haven’t finished yet and to explain how they set about doing it. That’s what I need. If you’re in a position to see someone painting or drawing, pay attention, because I believe that many an art dealer would think differently about many paintings &c. if he rightly knew how they were made. It’s true that one can understand it instinctively to some extent, but of this I’m certain, that I acquired a better understanding of various things precisely by seeing someone at work and by experimenting a little myself. I’d very much like to have some of that Ingres paper sometime. Soon the weather might be good enough to sit outdoors, and then it would be very useful to me. I’m beginning to be miserly with my studies and should like to have back the ones you’ve got. Adieu, old chap, accept a handshake in thought, poor Mauve, he won’t be better before his large painting is finished and afterwards he’ll be exhausted. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo. You’ll perhaps find it rather harsh, what I wrote to you about Tersteeg. By no means do I take it back, though. Tersteeg is someone who is extremely hard of hearing, though I don’t consider him deaf. He must be told things very decidedly, otherwise it doesn’t penetrate his armour. For years he’s thought me a kind of blockhead and dreamer, he still views me as such, and even says about my drawings: that’s a kind of opium daze you administer to yourself so as not to feel the pain you suffer at not being able to make watercolours. Now then, that’s very cleverly put, but that expression is actually ill-considered, superficial and doesn’t hold water (the main reason I can’t make watercolours straightaway is that I must draw more seriously and pay attention to proportion and perspective). Similarly, Mr T.’s ‘practical talks’ (say) on art couldn’t be more impracticable. It doesn’t help him even if he uses as arguments some things that could be called conversation killers, because it’s difficult to find an answer to them. Enough – I don’t deserve his reproaches, and if my drawings don’t amuse His Hon. neither does it amuse me to show them to His Hon. like that. 
   He condemns drawings of mine which contain much that is good, and I hadn’t expected that of His Hon. If I make serious studies from a model it’s a lot more practical than his practical talks about saleability or unsaleability, about which I – having dealt in paintings and drawings myself, for that matter – don’t need to be enlightened by His Hon. to the extent that he thinks. I’d prefer, then, to lose his friendship than agree with him about this. Although at times I’m overwhelmed by worries, all the same, I’m calm, and my calmness is based on my serious approach to my work and on reflection. Although I have moments of passion, and my disposition tends to make them worse, nonetheless I’m composed, as His Hon., who’s known me long enough, very well knows. Now he even said to me: you have too much patience. Those words aren’t right, one can’t have too much patience in art, that word is beyond the pale. Perhaps in my case Mr H.G.T. has too little patience. Now he must see, once and for all, that I’m setting to work seriously and won’t let myself be forced into sending work into the world that doesn’t bear the stamp of my own character. My own character is beginning to emerge particularly in my last drawings??? studies???, which Tersteeg rejected. 
   Perhaps – perhaps I’d succeed even now in making something in the genre of watercolour that could perhaps be sold with a great deal of effort. But that would be forcing watercolours to grow in the hothouse. Tersteeg and you must wait for the natural season, and it hasn’t arrived yet. He spoke English when he was here because of the model. I said to him: in due time you shall have your watercolours, now you can’t – they are not due yet. Take your time. And I’m sticking to that. Enough. Since T.’s visit I’ve made a drawing of an orphan boy polishing shoes. It might have been done with a hand that doesn’t exactly obey my will yet, but even so it contains the type of that orphan boy. And no matter how clumsy my hand, that hand will still have to end up doing what my head wants. So I’ve made a study of the studio with the stove, the fireplace, easel, tabouret, table &c., of course not exactly saleable just now, but very good for putting perspective into practice. I’m longing for you to come, you have quite a lot to see, which I’ve made since your visit last summer. Theo, I’m counting on your looking at my work with sympathy and with confidence, and not with two minds or dissatisfaction. Tersteeg thinks, because I work so much, that it’s easy, that’s where he’s also mistaken. But I’m actually a drudge or a draught ox. 
   If you come, would you be sure and think of the Ingres paper? It’s the thick one in particular that I like to work on, and it seems to me it must lend itself even to studies in watercolour. Believe me that in artistic matters the words hold true: Honesty is the best policy. Better to put a bit more effort into serious study than being stylish to win over the public. Occasionally, in times of worry, I’ve longed to be stylish, but on second thoughts I say no – just let me be myself – and express severe, rough, yet true things with rough workmanship. I won’t run after the art lovers or dealers, let those who are interested come to me. In due time we shall reap if we faint not. Oh well. Listen, Theo, what a man that Millet was! I have the big work by Sensier on loan from De Bock. It interests me so much that I wake up at night and light the lamp and go on reading. Because during the day I have to work. Do send me something soon if it’s at all possible. I wish that for once Tersteeg had to face a week of doing what I do on what I have to spend, he’d notice that it’s not dozing or dreaming or an opium daze, but that one has to be wide awake to combat the many difficulties that crop up. Nor is it easy to find models and to get them to pose. Most painters are driven to desperation by it. Especially when one has to scrimp – go short of – food, drink, clothing in order to pay them. Well, Tersteeg is Tersteeg and I am I. Nonetheless, rest assured, I’m not opposed to, i.e. hostile towards him, but I must make him understand that he judges me too superficially and – and – I believe that he’ll change his mind – I sincerely hope so, because being at odds with His Hon. pains me very much and makes life difficult for me. I hope your letter comes soon – my last pennies are for posting this letter. It’s only been a few days since I received the 10 guilders from Tersteeg, but that same day I had to pay 6 guilders of it to the model, to the baker, to the girl who sweeps the studio. Adieu, I wish you health and good cheer, in spite of everything I’m not without good cheer either. I shake your hand. Vincent 
   I had a very pleasant visit from Jules Bakhuyzen, and I may go and visit him whenever I wish. Here you have a few words that struck me and moved me in Sensier’s Millet, sayings of Millet. Art is a battle4 – you have to put your whole life into art. One must work like a bunch of negroes. I’d rather say nothing than express myself weakly. It was only yesterday that I read that last saying of Millet, but I’d felt the same before then, which is why I sometimes feel the need to scratch in what I feel not with a soft brush but a hard carpenter’s pencil and a pen. Watch out! Tersteeg! Watch out! You’re clearly wrong. 
   Theo, it’s almost miraculous!!! First of all, a message arrives that I must go and fetch your letter. Secondly, C.M. comes, orders 12 small pen drawings from me, views of The Hague, having seen a few that were finished (Paddemoes. The Geest district – Vleersteeg were finished)8 for a rijksdaalder9 apiece, the price set by me. With the promise that if I make them to his liking he’ll order 12 more, but for which he’ll fix the price higher than I do. Thirdly, I run into Mauve, successfully delivered of his large painting, promises to come by soon. So, it’s fine – it’s going well – it’ll get even better!11 And something else moved me, and moved me deeply – I’d said that the model didn’t have to come today – I hadn’t said why – but the poor woman came anyway and I protested. Yes, but I’m not coming to be drawn, I’m just coming to make sure you’ve got something to eat – she had a portion of string beans and potatoes with her. There are indeed things in life that are worth the effort. My dear Theo, You will have received my letters, I’m answering yours, received this afternoon. In accordance with your request, I immediately sent Tersteeg 10 guilders, lent to me this week by His Hon. I wrote to you about C.M.’s order, this is what happened. C.M. appeared to have spoken to Tersteeg before he came to see me, at any rate began talking about things like ‘earning your bread’. My answer suddenly came to me, quickly and, I believe, correctly. Here’s what I said: earn my bread, what do you mean by that? – to earn one’s bread or to deserve one’s bread — not to deserve one’s bread, that is to say, to be unworthy of one’s bread, that’s what’s a crime, every honest man being worthy of his crust — but as for not earning it at all, while at the same time deserving it, oh, that! is a misfortune and A great misfortune. So, if you’re saying to me here and now: you’re unworthy of your bread, I understand that you’re insulting me, but if you’re making the moderately fair comment to me that I don’t always earn it because sometimes I’m short of it, so be it, but what’s the use of making that comment to me? It’s scarcely useful to me if it ends there. I recently tried, I continued, to explain this to Tersteeg, but either he’s hard of hearing in that ear or my explanation was a little confused because of the pain his words caused me. 
   C.M. then kept quiet about earning one’s bread. The storm threatened again because I happened to mention the name Degroux in connection with expression. C.M. suddenly asked, But surely you know there was something untoward about Degroux’s private life? You understand that there C.M. touched a tender spot and ventured on to thin ice. I really can’t let that be said about good père Degroux. So I replied, it has always seemed to me that when an artist shows his work to people he has the right to keep to himself the inner struggle of his own private life (which is directly and inextricably connected with the singular difficulties involved in producing a work of art) – unless he unburdens himself to a very intimate friend. It is, I say, indelicate for a critic to dig up something blameworthy from the private life of someone whose work is above criticism. Degroux is a master like Millet, like Gavarni. C.M. had certainly not viewed Gavarni, at least, as a master. (To anyone but C.M. I could have expressed myself more succinctly by saying: an artist’s work and his private life are like a woman in childbed and her child. You may look at her child, but you may not lift up her chemise to see if there are any bloodstains on it, that would be indelicate on the occasion of a maternity visit.) 
   I was already beginning to fear that C.M. would hold it against me – but fortunately things took a turn for the better. As a diversion I got out my portfolio with smaller studies and sketches. At first he said nothing – until we came to a little drawing that I’d sketched once with Breitner, parading around at midnight – namely Paddemoes (that Jewish quarter near the Nieuwe Kerk), seen from Turfmarkt. I’d set to work on it again the next morning with the pen. Jules Bakhuyzen had also looked at the thing and recognized the spot immediately. Could you make more of those townscapes for me? said C.M. Certainly, because I amuse myself with them sometimes when I’ve worked myself to the bone with the model – here’s Vleersteeg5 – the Geest district6 – Vischmarkt. Make 12 of those for me. Certainly, I said, but that means we’re doing a bit of business, so let’s talk straightaway about the price. My price for a drawing of that size, whether with pencil or pen, I’ve fixed for myself at a rijksdaalder8 – does that seem unreasonable to you? No – he simply says – if they turn out well I’ll ask for another 12 of Amsterdam, provided you let me fix the price, then you’ll earn a bit more. Well, it seems to me that that’s not a bad way to end a visit I had rather dreaded. Because I actually made an agreement with you, Theo, simply to tell you things like this in my own way, as it flows from my pen, I’m describing these little scenes to you just as they happen. Especially because in this way, even though you’re absent, you get a glimpse of my studio anyway. I’m longing for you to come, because then I can talk to you more seriously about things concerning home, for instance. 
   C.M.’s order is a bright spot! I’ll try to do those drawings carefully and put some spirit into them. And in any case you’ll see them, and I believe, old chap, that there’s more of such business. Buyers for 5-franc drawings can be found. With a bit of practice, I’ll make one every day and voilà, if they sell well, a crust of bread and a guilder a day for the model. The lovely season with long days is approaching, I’ll make the ‘soup ticket’, i.e. the bread and model drawing, either in the morning or the evening, and during the day I’ll study seriously from the model. C.M. is one buyer I found myself. Who knows whether you won’t succeed in turning up a second, and perhaps Tersteeg, when he’s recovered from his reproachful fury, a third, and then things can move along. Tomorrow morning I’ll go and look for a subject for one of those for C.M. I was at Pulchri this evening – Tableaux vivants and a kind of farce by Tony Offermans. I skipped the farce, because I can’t stand caricatures or the fug of an assembly hall, but I wanted to see the tableaux vivants, especially because one of them was done after an etching I gave Mauve as a present, Nicolaas Maes, the stable at Bethlehem. (The other was Rembrandt, Isaac blessing Jacob, with a superb Rebecca who watches to see if her ruse will succeed.) The Nicolaas Maes was very good in chiaroscuro and even colour – but in my opinion not worth tuppence as far as expression goes. The expression was definitely wrong. I saw it once in real life, not the birth of the baby Jesus, mind you, but the birth of a calf. And I still know exactly what its expression was like. There was a girl there, at night in that stable – in the Borinage – a brown peasant face with a white night-cap among other things, she had tears in her eyes of compassion for the poor cow when the animal went into labour and was having great difficulty. It was pure, holy, wonderfully beautiful like a Correggio, like a Millet, like an Israëls. Oh Theo – why don’t you let it all go hang and become a painter? Old chap – you could do it if you wanted to. I sometimes suspect you of keeping a great landscapist hidden inside you. It seems to me you’d be extremely good at drawing birch trunks and sketching the furrows of a field or stubble field, and painting snow and sky &c. Just between you and me. I shake your hand. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Here’s a list of Dutch paintings intended for the Salon. Israëls, an old man13 (if he weren’t a fisherman he’d be Tom Carlyle – the author of the French Revolution and Oliver Cromwell14 – for he definitely has that distinctive head of Carlyle), an old man sits in a hut by the fireplace in which a small piece of peat barely glows in the twilight. For it’s a dark hut the old man sits in, an old hut with a small window with a little white curtain. His dog, who’s grown old with him, sits beside him – those two old creatures look at each other, they look each other in the eye, the dog and the old man. And meanwhile the man takes his tobacco box out of his trousers pocket and he fills his pipe like that in the twilight. Nothing else – the twilight, the quiet, the loneliness of those two old creatures, man and dog, the familiarity of those two, that old man thinking – what’s he thinking about? – I don’t know – I can’t say – but it must be a deep, a long thought, something, though I don’t know what, surfacing from long ago, perhaps that’s what gives that expression to his face – a melancholy, satisfied, submissive expression, something that recalls that famous verse by Longfellow that always ends, But the thoughts of youth are long long thoughts. I’d like to see that painting by Israëls as a pendant to Millet’s Death and the woodcutter. I definitely know of no other painting than this Israëls that can stand up to Millet’s Death and the woodcutter, that one can see at the same time, on the other hand I know of no other painting that could stand up to this Israëls than Millet’s Death and the woodcutter, no other painting that one can see at the same time as this Israëls. Moreover, I feel in my mind an irresistible desire to bring together that painting by Israëls and that other by Millet and make them complement each other. It seems to me that what this Israëls lacks is having Millet’s Death and the woodcutter hanging close by, one at one end and the other at the other end of a long, narrow room, with no other painting in that gallery but those two and them alone. 
   It’s a fabulous Israëls, I couldn’t really see anything else, it made such a deep impression on me. And yet, there was another Israëls, a small one with 5 or 6 figures, I think, a labourer’s family at table. There’s a Mauve, the large painting of the pink being dragged onto the dunes, it’s a masterpiece. I’ve never heard a good sermon about resignation nor been able to imagine one, except for this painting by Mauve and the work of Millet. It is indeed resignation, but the true kind, not that of the clergymen. Those nags, those poor, sorry-looking nags, black, white, brown, they stand there, patiently submissive, willing, resigned, still. They’ll soon have to drag the heavy boat the last bit of the way, the job’s almost done. They stand still for a moment, they pant, they’re covered in sweat, but they don’t murmur, they don’t protest – they don’t complain – about anything. They’re long past that, years ago already. They’re resigned to living and working a while longer, but if they have to go to the knacker’s yard tomorrow, so be it, they’re ready for it. I find such a wonderfully elevated, practical, wordless philosophy in this painting, it seems to be saying, to know how to suffer without complaining, that’s the only practical thing, that’s the great skill, the lesson to learn, the solution to life’s problem. It seems to me that this painting by Mauve would be one of those rare paintings which Millet would stand in front of for a long time, mumbling to himself, he has a good heart, that painter. There were other paintings – I must say I scarcely looked at them, I had enough with the above-mentioned. 
   Listen Theo, wouldn’t you like to ponder whether there’s not a great landscapist in you? We should both of us quite simply become painters, we’d be able to make a living at it. For the figure one must be more of a draught ox or work-horse, more a man of hard labour. There’s a long long thought for you – old boy. 
   Theo, remain something better than HGT. When I first got to know him, HGT was better than now, he’d been a bigwig only a short time and was newly married. Now he’s been caught, he’s trapped. He’ll grow more and more to have secret regrets about many, many things and will be forced to conceal them. The thing is, Theo, my brother, not to let your hands be tied by anyone, especially not with a gilt chain. I have to say that the chain tying Tersteeg is very beautiful to look at, but anyone who thinks about it doesn’t envy his position. Be that as it may, artist is healthier – pecuniary difficulties are the greatest worry, I repeat, you, and you as a landscape painter, would surmount them sooner than I, though I, too, shall pull through some day. But, if you push off immediately, you’ll overtake me, because the figure is complicated, takes longer. You’ll understand that I speak in all seriousness. My dear Theo, Thinking it over later, I thought it might possibly have seemed strange to you to find in my last letter a remark about something I’d never discussed with you before, a remark, moreover, in a rather peremptory tone, namely something like: Theo, let it all go hang and become a painter. There’s a great landscapist in you. It may well be that these words slipped out at a time when my emotions were somewhat aroused. But that doesn’t mean that it isn’t the same with this as it is with other things that sometimes escape my lips in spite of myself, in anger or if some emotion or other is aroused. The fact is that what I say at such times are things I’ve kept bottled up for a long time, which I then say, sometimes in rough terms. But even though I’d express it better in a calmer mood, or keep it to myself, it’s absolutely certain that I’m most decidedly of that opinion, particularly in a calm mood. Now it’s out, so out it will stay, I finally said it in spite of myself – I couldn’t help it – in rough words anyhow – but you know my secret thoughts. And if I wrote ‘remain something better than HGT’ and if I gave you to understand that I don’t think very highly of art dealers in general – it’s true that those are things I could have kept to myself – but now that I’ve broken the silence and spoken – well, then, this is how I speak. 
   As regards H.G.T., I knew His Hon. during a remarkable period in his life, when he’d only just ‘worked his way up’, as they say, and was newly married as well. The impression he made on me then was a strong one – he was a practical man – extremely clever and lively, energetic in small and large things as well, he radiated poetry, as it were, but of the true, unsentimental kind. Then I had such respect for him that I always kept my distance, and I considered him a being of a higher order than myself. Since – since – since – I’ve sometimes doubted – more and more – and yet I never had the courage to take the scalpel of analysis and scrutiny to him. Now, though, at a time when I must be very much on the qui vive and mustn’t spoil my career for anyone’s sake, the above-mentioned scalpel hasn’t spared him. And while I was sitting in his little office or speaking to him in the gallery with a very ordinary expression on my face, asking him a couple of very ordinary questions, I was taking the measure of him as cold-bloodedly as I could. I’d thought that he was someone who gave himself the air of a money man, of a man of the world – anyway I don’t know how to say it in one word, I think you’ll understand what I mean, who had a lot of feeling and a warm heart hidden behind that iron mask. 
   But I found that armour to be incredibly thick, so thick that I can’t say for certain whether the man is made of solid metal, be it steel or silver, or whether deep, deep down in that iron there’s still some small corner in which a human heart beats. If there’s no heart in him then my affection for him comes to an abrupt end, and instead there’s a ‘what are you doing to me? you irritate me’. So that in half a year or a year he’ll either leave me completely cold or – or  perhaps – I’ll find a way to get along better with His Hon. Meanwhile – he’s His Hon. to me. One doesn’t think in those terms of someone for whom one feels warm sympathy. His Hon. suggests something boring. Enough. Enough. Theo, I’m certainly no landscape painter, if I were to make landscapes there would always be something of the figure about them. I think it very good, though, that there are also people who are essentially landscapists. And it preoccupies me greatly that you might be just such a person – without knowing it. The opposite preoccupies me just as much. Namely, Theo, are you in fact essentially a dealer? If I had to prove the theory, I’d perhaps turn it round and reduce it to an absurdity. Be that as it may, think about it sometime, I don’t have to tell you to think it over before beginning to paint, but perhaps you won’t hold it against me if I say: Theo, until now you’ve been free to do whatever you like, but if 
   you ever make an agreement with Messrs G&Cie in which you promise to remain with their firm for the rest of your life, you’ll no longer be a free man. And – it appears to me that there’s a possibility that there will come a time in one’s life when one regrets having bound oneself in that way. You’ll no doubt say to me, the time may come when some will regret having become painters. And, for my part, what could I say to that? Those who come to regret it are those who neglect serious study in the beginning and rush helter-skelter to get to the top. At any rate, the men of the day are men of one day, but anyone who has so much faith and love that he takes pleasure precisely in what others think tedious, namely the study of anatomy, perspective and proportion, they remain, and mature slowly but surely. When, short of money, I forgot myself for a moment and thought, I’ll simply try and make something that has a certain look, the result was appalling, I couldn’t do it – and Mauve rightly got angry at me and said: that’s not the way, tear those things up. And at first that sounded too harsh to me, but later I cut them up myself. But then when I started drawing more seriously, Tersteeg criticized it and got angry – and overlooked the good things in my drawings and demanded ‘saleable’ ones right away. Anyway, you immediately see from this that there’s a difference between Mauve and Tersteeg. Mauve is increasingly serious, the more one thinks about him, but can Tersteeg stand the test? I hope so, but doubt whether he’ll stand up to scrutiny as well as M. And how is it with those who are at bottom serious, even though they often have something unpleasant about them? – one begins to love them and starts to feel at home with them – one gets bored with those who aren’t serious enough. 
   You mustn’t think that I’ve overlooked the change in financial circumstances that a change of career would mean for you. Yet what impels me to speak to you about this is that I feel, even beset by financial difficulties, that nothing is more solid than ‘handiwork’, in the literal sense of working with the hands. If you became a painter, one of the things that would amaze you is that painting and everything connected with it is really rather hard work from a physical point of view; quite apart from the mental exertion, turning things over in one’s mind, it requires a fair amount of effort, and that day after day. Well, I shan’t talk about it any more today, only to say this: when you come to Holland I’d like to talk to you alone, not for half an hour but for an entire morning, for instance, about some practical things I’ve learned, whether through practising on my own or through Mauve or others, as if I had to explain them to you in order to teach you. I hope that you won’t object – at worst you’ll be bored that morning, but perhaps it won’t bore you. I only hope that, then, in the meantime, you won’t be thinking of ‘selling’ paintings but of ‘how to do it’. And that you won’t consider it a temptation of the devil. Well, we’ll see. If you could send me some money around the end of this month it would be very welcome. Around that time I also hope to have the 12 for C.M. finished. If he pays for them straightaway 
   that will put 30 guilders in my pocket. If something from you is added to that, I’d venture to buy a couple of shirts and underwear, which I need very, very badly. Seeing as the shirts &c. that I have are getting into a deplorable state, and I have very few anyway. Since I wrote to you I’ve been working always with the same models, and I must say I’m glad to have found ones like them. I’m busy drawing heads, I must also – though it can’t all be done at once – draw hands and feet, it’s really high time. And when summer comes and the cold is no longer an obstacle, I simply must make some studies of the nude one way or another. Not exactly academic poses. But I wanted, for instance, so very, very much to have, for example, a nude model for a digger or seamstress. From the front, from the back, from the side. To learn to see and sense the shape through the clothing and get a clear idea of the movement. I reckon that 12 or so studies, 6 men, 6 women, would already give me a great deal of insight. Each study costs a day’s work. The difficulty also lies very much in finding models for this purpose, and if I could avoid it I’d like to avoid having a nude model in the studio, so as not to make other models timid. 
   The fear ‘that they have to strip naked’ is usually the first scruple to be overcome when approaching someone about posing. At least I’ve had this experience here more than once. I even had it with a very old man, who, incidentally, would probably have been very Ribera-like5 as a nude model. But after all I’m not looking for Ribera, and still less Salvator Rosa, I don’t see things that way. I’m not even enthusiastic about Decamps, I’m not at ease in front of their paintings, and can’t dwell on them without feeling that I’m missing or losing sight of something. I’d sooner Goya or Gavarni, then, even though they both say ‘Nada’. As the last word?? ‘Nada’, it seems to me, means exactly the same as those words of Solomon, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, but I can’t sleep on that without having nightmares. Oh well. It’s too late for philosophizing, though, considering I have to get up tomorrow at half past five, because the carpenter is coming to do a little job for me before he goes to work. So good-night and believe me, I mean it very seriously when I speak to you about your becoming a painter, adieu. Ever yours, Vincent I’ve made two more small drawings for C.M., a bit of Scheveningseweg and sand workers in the dunes. 
   Now that I’ve given Tersteeg his money back I’m afraid that when the landlord9 comes round at the end of March I won’t have much for him. That’s why I’d like you to send whatever you can towards the end of March, if you could. Theo, Sunday I went to see De Bock10 again – I don’t know why, but each time I go to see him I feel the same: that chap’s too weak, he won’t succeed – unless he changes, unless – unless – I find something worn out, something blasé, something insincere about him that oppresses me, there’s something consumptive about the atmosphere in his house. And yet – it’s not really obvious – and perhaps there are few among his acquaintances who think of him as I do. Oh well. Still, he sometimes makes lovely things, not without charm and grace at any rate, but is that enough? So much is demanded that nowadays painting is almost an offensive, a military campaign, a battle or war. Friday morning Theo, I’ve been working hard these last few days, and have been at it from morning till night. First, the small drawings for C.M. They’re finished and have been sent to him, but I’d hoped that His Hon. would have sent the money immediately, and now that he hasn’t sent it immediately I’m afraid it’s slipped his mind, and when will he send it now??? I continue drawing similar small townscapes nearly every day and I’m getting the hang of it. I wish that Tersteeg and others who claim to be fond of me or willing to help me would ask me for things I can make instead of demanding impossibilities that discourage rather than encourage me. Well, so be it. But I did think that C.M. would pay me immediately. They were certainly no worse than the example that prompted His Hon. to order them, and they gave me enough trouble, more than 30 guilders’ worth at the very least. If people understood that nothing is nothing, and that days without a penny in one’s pocket are very tough and difficult, then I don’t think they’d begrudge me that little bit of money I get from you, 
   which allows me to keep my head above water at this difficult time, or make me faint-hearted by reproaching me because of what I get from you. Theo, I believe that Tersteeg does neither you nor me a good turn by meddling in this matter. He has nothing to do with it. If I work hard, do I not earn my bread? Or am I not worth the means to carry out my work? I just wish, old chap, that you’d come here soon and see whether or not I’m deceiving you. Blommers has asked me to give a talk one evening at Pulchri1 about my collection of woodcuts after Herkomer, Frank Holl, 
      Du Maurier &c. I’d very much like to do it, I have enough for two evenings if necessary. At any rate, I’m well and I feel I’m progressing in my work. I have to draw for about a year more, or at least several months yet, until my hand is steady and sure, and my eye, and then I see no reason at all why I shouldn’t become very productive commercially. That I ask for those few months’ time is reasonable. It can’t happen faster than that, or else I’d produce poor work and that’s not necessary, with a bit of waiting I’ll produce good work. Can you send me something one of these days? I hope so. You know I gave Tersteeg the 10 guilders back. I repeat, I wish you’d become a painter, you could do it if you wanted to, and 
   you’d lose nothing by it, only become something better, it seems to me, than if you remain an art dealer, even if you were the very best of art dealers. Still, to make the most of your potential, you’d have to throw yourself into it with all your might. I haven’t sent you any more sketches recently – I’m waiting now until you come here yourself – it’s better that way. Am busy with figures, and also with a couple of landscapes of a nursery here in Schenkweg. Since when, I’d like to know, is one allowed to force or try to force an artist to change either his working method or his ideas? I find it very rude to try such a thing, especially if it’s someone like Tersteeg, who has the presumption to think he has ‘manners’.  Theo, if you can send me something, do, and every day earlier that you can send it is one day less of unpleasantness for me. Oh well, it’s back to work in any case. Adieu, write soon. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, I’ve set about writing to you several times, but I couldn’t bring myself to finish the letter, because I wanted to write to you about various reasons why I thought it such a natural thing for you to become a painter. But I didn’t like what I’d written, and I couldn’t find any words that were strong enough. Your objections are indeed serious, but on the other hand there are a great many things that weigh against them. By your 30th year you could have progressed to the extent that people must respect you as a painter and take your work seriously. And in your 30th year you’ll still be young. What you’ve learned at Goupil, your knowledge of many things, means that you have exactly what it takes to catch up with many who ‘started early’. Because those early starters often have a period of staying at the same level fruitlessly for years, and that period isn’t necessary for someone who starts energetically at a later age. Painting is just as good a profession by which to earn a living as, for example, smith or doctor. An artist, in any case, is the exact opposite of someone living a life of leisure, and as I said, if one wants to draw a parallel, then either a smith or a doctor corresponds more closely. Now that you write about it, I remember very well that when you spoke to me back then about my becoming a painter, I thought it very inappropriate and wouldn’t hear of it. What made me stop doubting is that I read a clearly written book on perspective, Cassagne, Guide de l’Abc du dessin, and a week later drew an interior of a little kitchen, with stove, chair and table and window in their place and on their legs, whereas it used to seem to me downright witchcraft or coincidence that one had depth and proper perspective in a drawing. 
   If you drew just one thing as it should be drawn, the desire to attack 1, other things would be irresistible. But the most difficult part is taking that first step. If a painter took you by the arm and said: Look, Theo, this is how you should draw that field, this is how the lines of the furrows run, for this reason or that they run like this and not otherwise, and must be brought into perspective like this. And that pollard willow being this big, the other one further on is by contrast that small, and that difference in size can be measured this way or that and – look! if you fling that down on paper then the broad outlines are immediately correct, and you have firm ground beneath your feet on which to continue. Such a talk, provided it’s accompanied by practice, would be more appropriate in the circumstances than a lot of discussion about either abstract or financial matters. And so I won’t venture further into that territory, but you’re on the verge of getting an idea of the practice one day soon – and if you should happen to draw something correctly or, in short, if you learn to see things in perspective, then your art dealership has had it, and you’ll feel, just like Correggio: I, too, am a painter, and then you’ll see immediately that you’re in your element and then – then – you’ll be younger and more full of life than ever before, then your second youth will begin, which is better than the first, because the second never ends, 
   thank God – doesn’t end like the other one. But the first youth – has left me and – and – is beginning to leave you. As regards Cor’s education and Ma’s bread – those two things won’t be lacking, not even if you become a painter. And as far as you’re concerned, your food, drink, sleep, your studio, your model –  they aren’t far off – and if the idea to paint should awaken in you, you’d see that it could be done. Nevertheless, so that you won’t suspect me of overlooking the financial side, I’d just like to say – yet with all due respect for your present position as an art dealer: unless one has a certain handicraft and can make something with his own hands, I doubt the soundness of the means of subsistence. Meaning that I consider the social position of Jaap Maris, for example, more solid and independent than that of H.G.T. – I have a lot of respect for intellect and intelligence, if those are lacking then one comes to nought in spite of one’s handicraft, because one can’t stand up and defend one’s own work – you see this in Thijs Maris. But it’s precisely those people who have the intellect and intelligence, and it goes without saying that I count you among them and I’d like to count myself among them too, it’s fitting that they’re eminently suited to handiwork. I repeat: if you take up painting you’ll succeed and, by your 30th year, you as a painter will have worked your way up, no less so in any respect than at present. A mediocrity in the bad sense of the word will certainly not be the case with you if you take up painting. As regards painting, there are two lines of reasoning, how not to do it4 and how to do it. How to do it: with much drawing and little colour. How not to do it: with much colour and little drawing. 
   Now I see the opportunity to manage very well if you can arrange it this month as you said, namely that around the 15th you give me another 100 francs to last until the beginning of May. From the 100 francs just sent I haven’t yet been able to pay Tersteeg5 – I have a lot of expenses – and I could wait no longer to buy a pair of trousers and pay the rent, for example. If you send some again around the middle of April, then I could pay him back, and will do so if you really wish it. Though I’d rather pay it back later with a drawing. That’s what I ought to be doing, I mustn’t give any cash back to dealers. My debt to you is something else. We don’t know how things will turn out. If you carry on as an art dealer, then in time you’ll be getting drawings and paintings for it – if you become a painter, then money, and gladly with interest. Regarding the money owed to Tersteeg, when I first came here, he and Mauve were so friendly and said I didn’t have to worry at all – but in less than a month they’d turned around and were talking completely differently. Perhaps thinking that I’d collapse. At first that grieved me – and then later it left me rather cold and I thought, I won’t let it upset me any more. Breitner’s in hospital, I visit him quite often to bring him books or drawing materials. C.M. paid me, and a new order, but difficult enough, 6 detailed, specific, townscapes. I’ll see that I make them in any case, because if I understand correctly I’ll get for these 6 as much as for the first 12. And then perhaps sketches of Amsterdam. Blommers was here to talk about a viewing of the woodcuts. Sat here looking at them for 3 hours, and was angry because Pulchri’s board had complained about ‘those things one sees now and then in the Zuid-Hollandsch Koffiehuis’. If that’s all they know about wood engraving they’re indeed competent to condemn! Still, Pulchri’s board had complained. Blommers wanted to go ahead with it anyway, and told me to have them ready for next Saturday. It’s very strange to hear some painters here discussing what they call ‘illustrators’, Gavarni, for instance, or Herkomer!! This NOT keeping abreast of things is part of what some of them call their ‘general education’. Good luck to them! Now, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent Accept my thanks for a wonderful box of Ingres paper and for the studies. One fine day when people start to say that I can in fact draw but not paint, perhaps I’ll appear with a painting just when they least expect it, but as long as it looks as though I must do it and may not do anything else, then I certainly won’t do it. April 82 My dear Theo, It shouldn’t surprise you that I wrote to you: become a painter. For I myself am now in a period in which I’m deriving some benefit from my earlier worries. Because as things are now, every week I make one thing or another that I couldn’t make before, and that’s what I spoke about, that it’s as though one were young again. And it’s the awareness that nothing – (except sickness) can rob me of the strength that’s now beginning to develop, it’s that awareness that gives me faith in the future and enables me to bear many unpleasantnesses in the present. It’s a wonderful thing to look at something and find it beautiful, to reflect on it and hold it fast and then to say: I’m going to draw that, and then to work on it until it’s done. Obviously that’s why I’m not yet content with my work to the extent that I think I needn’t do it any better. But the way to do it better later is to do it as well as one can today, there can’t be anything but progress tomorrow. Naturally I don’t know what you’ll think of my drawings when you finally see them, but this much I do know, I’m greatly longing for you to come. 
   And if I write to you, become a painter, then it really isn’t because I think that in your present position there isn’t a very great deal that’s beautiful. But I find being a painter more beautiful, and I wish you worked in your own studio instead of at a reading-desk in the office. There you have it. I know for certain that something would awaken in you in your own studio which you don’t know of now – a huge, hidden force of working and creating. And once it’s awake, it’s awake for good. When I hear Tersteeg talking about agreeableness and saleability I can only think: work one has slaved away at and done one’s best to imbue with character and sentiment can be neither disagreeable nor unsaleable. And perhaps it’s better that one doesn’t immediately please everyone. What wonderful weather we’re having – there’s spring in everything. I can’t let go of the figure, for that’s No. 1 for me, but sometimes I can’t keep myself from going outdoors. But I’m busy with difficult things that I can’t let slide. Recently I’ve been making many studies of parts of the figure: heads, neck, breast, shoulder. See the enclosed scratch. I’d very much like to make more studies of the nude. You know I’ve drawn the Exercices au fusain, several times even, but they don’t include any female figures.
   Of course, doing it from life is something entirely different. A little drawing like the enclosed is simple enough in line, but it’s difficult enough to capture those simple, characteristic lines when one is sitting in front of the model. Those lines are now so simple that one can outline them with the pen, but I repeat, the problem is finding those broad outlines, so that one can say what’s essential with a couple of strokes or scratches. Choosing the lines in such a way that it’s obvious, as it were, that they must run thus, that’s something that isn’t obvious, however. It’s true, Theo, that recently, since I’ve been in The Hague, I’ve spent more than 100 francs a month, but if I didn’t do that, I couldn’t work with a model, and would remain at the same level, making no progress. I see this in other painters: Breitner, for example. They’re afraid to take a model regularly, and they work little and slowly – if only it were good anyway, but it isn’t even that. Breitner had been taking a model again lately, though, and there was of course more spirit in his work, but then he fell ill. The English painters, certainly the draughtsmen for The Graphic &c., have a model nearly every day. Without that it really doesn’t work, in my opinion. If someone with many years of experience draws figures from the imagination after a great deal of study, fine, but to work systematically from the imagination seems overly rash to me. Israëls and Blommers and Neuhuys don’t do that, even though they have so much experience.
   If I’ve spent more than 100 francs a month here, it’s because it’s5 not possible to spend less. And believe me, I don’t throw it around rashly or too freely. I do wish I didn’t have to give Tersteeg the 25 guilders back yet, because I really need the money to be able to go on working energetically. Tersteeg is none the poorer by it, and in the beginning he himself said that I needn’t worry about it. Even though every 25 guilders less means that my work suffers and that I can’t do what really needs to be done. If I fill my portfolios with studies I’ll get my money’s worth out of them later. And I’d rather earn a bit more later than now. I’d rather see to it that I’m equal to my profession than rush to sell a drawing by the grace of God. The enclosed drawing was scratched after a larger study6 which has a more sombre expression. There’s a poem by Tom Hood, I believe, in which he tells of a great lady who can’t sleep at night because during the day, when she went out to buy a frock, she saw the poor seamstresses pale, consumptive, emaciated, working in an airless room. And now she has twinges of remorse about her wealth and wakes up at night in panic. In short, it’s a slender, white female figure, restless in the dark night. If I must, I’ll talk no more about it and give Tersteeg the 25 guilders when you send money again, but if it could be arranged, I’d prefer to wait until he takes a drawing for it later, because now I definitely need as much money as I can possibly spare for my studies. Anyway, it seems to me that Tersteeg won’t be so severe as not to understand that at the moment 25 guilders are worth more to me than they are to His Hon. Well, I wish you well, and remember, I hope you’re working in your own studio in the near future. It needn’t happen too quickly – but I believe that after a relatively short time of worry, you’d be happier once and for all. Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent P.S. I don’t have many studies of the nude yet, but there are some that bear a very close resemblance to the Bargues, are they therefore less original? Perhaps it’s because I learned to look at nature through the Bargues. 
    My dear Theo, Today I sent you 1 drawing1 by post which I’m sending to you as a token of gratitude for so much that you’ve done for me during this otherwise hard winter. Last summer, when you had that large woodcut by Millet, ‘the shepherdess’, I thought: how much one can do with one single line! Naturally I don’t presume to say as much as Millet with a single outline. But I’ve nevertheless tried to put some sentiment into this figure. Now I only hope that this figure is to your liking. 
   And now you see at the same time that I’m hard at work. Now that I’ve started, I’d like to make around 30 studies of the nude. The enclosed is, I think, the best figure I’ve drawn, that’s why I thought I’d send it to you. This isn’t the study from the model and yet it’s directly from the model. You should know that I had two sheets underneath my paper. Well, I’d toiled to get the outlines right and when I took the drawing off the plank it was very cleanly impressed on the two underlying sheets 
   and then I immediately worked it up after the first study, so that this one is even fresher than the first. I’ve kept the other two and wouldn’t like to part with them. At the same time you’ll see from this that it isn’t without reason that I wrote to you that I wished the money for H.G.T. could wait, I need it so much myself now, and working hard with a model seems to me to be the quickest way of getting right on top of it. The model I have isn’t at all expensive, but because the expense recurs day after day it’s often difficult for me to pay it. Anyway, arrange it as best you can, but if it’s convenient for you, send what you spoke of not too late in the month. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent It seems to me that this drawing would do well in a simple grey mount. 
   Naturally I don’t always draw like this. But I’m extremely fond of those English drawings that are done in this style, so it’s no wonder that I tried to do the same for once, and because it was for you, who understands these things, I didn’t hesitate to be somewhat melancholy. I wanted to say something like But the heart’s emptiness remains That nothing will make full again as it says in Michelet’s book. My dear Theo, I received your last letter with the 150 francs enclosed in good order and thank you for it most sincerely. I’m very glad that you saw something in the drawing I sent, I also thought there was something in it. I’d very much like you to have a small, simple grey mount put around it, because it will look best in that. In addition, I found something you said about the look of some drawings, as having a je ne sais quoi that can best be compared to an undeburred etching, correct to some extent. I believe, though, that this curious effect which connoisseurs set great store by – rightly so, in my opinion – is caused in drawings (not in etchings, of course, since there it’s the burr of the plate) more by a peculiar trembling of the hand when one works with emotion than by the materials with which one draws. Among my studies I have a couple which appear to be what I’ll simply call undeburred. If I didn’t fix your drawing – or if I worked on it here and there after fixing it, so that there are some places with an unpleasant sheen – go ahead and pour a large glass of milk, or water and milk, over it and let it dry, and you’ll see that a peculiar dull black is produced, much stronger than one usually sees in a pencil drawing.
   To achieve that peculiar undeburred look, one should use not chalk, I believe, but rather charcoal that has been soaked in linseed oil first. Of course I immediately returned the 25 guilders to Mr T., and received a receipt for it WITHOUT ONE WORD BEING SAID. It may be that His Hon. speaks of being offended, but I’d rather he considered for once how it must have offended me to hear again and again things like: you don’t earn your bread, or: you’ve lost your rights, or: you should have been given a slap in the face, and I don’t know what all. You see, truly, things like that certainly offend not less, but infinitely more, than what I said to His Hon., things like that sometimes cut right through one and sting one to the quick. But what good does it do to talk about it? As to whether His Hon. buys or not, I consider that an entirely different matter, and one that ought to be completely separate from personal disputes or differences of opinion about this or that. Whether His Hon. buys or not depends, I should think, not on my person but on my work. Let him buy my work or not according to whether I progress or whether or not he wants it, either for himself or for another art lover. But it’s not exactly fair to let a personal antipathy influence 
   the judgement of a work or, conversely, to let oneself be led by the personal appeal of this artist or that to overlook the faults in his work. There is, to be sure, a connection between a person and his work, but it’s not easy to define the nature of that connection, and many are badly mistaken about it. And well – yes, I know that Ma is ill – and I also know many more sombre things, both in our own and in other families. And I’m not insensitive to them, and it seems to me that I couldn’t draw Sorrowa if I didn’t feel it myself. Even so, since last summer it’s become very clear to me that the disharmony between Pa and Ma and me has become a chronic condition, because for far too long there was estrangement and a great deal of misunderstanding between us. So that now it’s come to the point where we must suffer for it on both sides. I mean, Pa and Ma could have done more for me, I could have done more for Pa and Ma, if we’d tried much earlier on both sides to live with one another and to share the good and the bad, always remembering that parents and children must remain united. Well, neither Pa and Ma nor I made those mistakes intentionally, and they can be attributed in very large measure to the force majeure of difficult circumstances and a hectic life. As it is now, I’m half a stranger and half a tiresome person and precious little else to Pa and Ma, and for my part I have an empty, lonely feeling at home.
   Our ways of thinking and occupations are so different that we hinder one another without either the one or the other meaning to do so – but I repeat, completely unintentionally. That is indeed a very dismal affair, but the world and life are full of such relationships, and oh, it’s actually useless and in fact injurious for us, no matter who we are, to reproach one another for it. And sometimes it’s best to avoid one another in such a case. I don’t know, though, if this would be best or if something else would be better. I wish I knew. Well, Pa and Ma find much comfort in their work and I in mine. Because, old chap, I work with a great deal of pleasure, despite the petty vexations. I’ve just received a letter from Rappard; was at odds with him for a while, but now we’re both interested in each other’s work again. In all likelihood he’ll come to see me soon. Went recently to see Blommers in his studio. The viewing of woodcuts didn’t take place after all, but I actually benefited by it in that I finally got round to sorting them out and putting them in order. Still, it’s impossible for me to put enough time or effort into finding them, since I’m more engrossed in drawing every day. Made another study of the nude today, a kneeling female figure, and yesterday the pose of a woman knitting, but also nude, as I wrote to you earlier that I’d wanted to do. Well, sleep well, it’s deep in the night, thanks again for what you sent, and believe me with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent I hope to make you a pendant to ‘Sorrow’. My dear Theo, Today I sent you 1 drawing of Kitchen gardens in Laan van Meerdervoort. So now you have a figure of mine2 and a landscape. And I think you’ll see that I’m not staying at the same level. Even though this is ‘only white and black’ and unsaleable??? and disagreeable??? I still hope that there may be something strong in it. And I think that, far from holding it against me for devoting myself specifically to drawing things, one can see it as definite proof that I’m taking the most practical path. Considering that one can more easily go from drawing to painting than the other way round: making paintings without drawing the necessary studies. It goes without saying that it gives me great displeasure and doesn’t make my life any easier when those whose sympathy I more or less thought I could count on, such as Mauve and H.G.T., become indifferent or hostile and hateful. I haven’t heard anything from Mauve, sometimes he’s ill, at other times he needs to rest or is too busy. How beautiful his painting for the Salon was. 
   But you understand these things yourself, so enough of this. This little drawing also needs a small grey mount. You write that you’ve moved house. I’ll do my best to make something now and then for the walls of your new home. I may also have a few nice woodcuts, if you’d like them, since I have duplicates of several nice things. But you must look at them when you come this summer. Though I haven’t moved, I’ve nevertheless made a change in my house by having a bedroom partitioned off in the attic, so I now have more room in my studio, the more so because the stove is gone. Drawing, you see, involves all kinds of things that many would prefer to disregard. 
   There’s the true perspective of an interior, for example (sometime I’ll send you one of those as well), there are the broad outlines of a landscape, and as for me, I see no chance of success without studying the nude. All of that is essentially drawing, much is clarified when one has mastered that to some extent, and I, for my part, go calmly on my way, knowing that if I persevere, before long I’ll overtake those who think they can skip over such things. Well, I wish you the best – it’s very bleak and windy here, which I find particularly annoying because I can’t get on with the townscapes for C.M., which I’d otherwise capture in my spare moments. But surely it will become mild again. With a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent Perhaps more effort went into this little drawing than into many a watercolour. I sent it to blvd Montmartre7 so that you could immediately mount it and press it flat. My dear Theo, I sometimes think to myself: if only my life were a bit easier, how much more and better I’d be able to work than now. I do work and, as I think you’ve seen from my last drawings, I’m beginning to understand how to overcome the difficulties – but you see, almost no day goes by without something else cropping up besides the effort of drawing, which would be difficult enough even if one had nothing else to endure. And, you see, there’s sorrow which I believe is really not my due – at least I don’t know what I’ve done to deserve it – and which I’d very much like to dispel. Be so good as to tell me frankly whether you know anything about the cause of the following and can enlighten me. At the end of January – about a fortnight after my arrival here, I think – Mauve’s attitude towards me suddenly changed very much – as unfriendly as he had been friendly. I attributed it to dissatisfaction with my work, and was so anxious and agitated about it that I became extremely upset and fell ill, as I wrote to you at the time. Mauve then came to see me and reassured me that everything would be all right and put courage into me.
   But one evening shortly afterwards he started talking to me again in such a totally different way that it seemed to me that I was confronted with a completely different man. I thought, my dear friend, it’s just as if someone has poured poison in your ear – slander, in fact – but I was in the dark as to where the venomous wind was coming from. Mauve began to do things like imitate my speech and my mannerisms, saying ‘that’s the face you pull’, ‘this is how you talk’, in a hateful way, but he’s very good at it, and I must admit it was a striking yet hatefully drawn caricature of me. On that occasion he said a couple of things which otherwise only H.G.T. used to say about me. And I asked him: Mauve, have you seen Tersteeg recently? No, said Mauve. And we went on talking, but around 10 minutes later he let slip that Tersteeg had in fact been to see him that very day. After that I couldn’t get the thought of Tersteeg out of my mind, and I thought, is it possible, my dear H.G.T., that Your Hon. is behind this? And I wrote a short but not impolite letter to H.G.T. Deliberately not impolite, though I said to him: Sir, it grieves me so if this or that is said of me, for example, you don’t earn your bread or you idle, you must realize that things like that are too crass for me to let them pass, and it makes my heart weak. These last few years I’ve had trouble enough because of that kind of thing, and it seems to me that now they should come to an end.  That was the letter which H.G.T. spoke to you about on his first visit to Paris. When he returned from Paris, I went to see him and said that I hoped he’d forgive me if I’d said things about His Hon. that weren’t applicable, because I was in the dark as to the cause of my predicament. At any rate, he was again very friendly to me – but although I still went to see Mauve, Mauve remained uneasy and rather unfriendly.
   And a couple of times I was told he wasn’t at home, and anyway there was every sign of a decided coolness. I began going there less and less, and Mauve never came to see me any more, even though it’s not far away. The way Mauve talked also became just as narrow-minded, if I may put it like that, as previously broad-minded. First and foremost, I had to draw from plaster casts. I utterly detest drawing from plaster casts – yet I had a couple of hands and feet hanging in the studio, though not for drawing. Once he spoke to me about drawing from plaster casts in a tone that even the worst teacher at the academy wouldn’t have used, and I held my peace, but at home I got so angry about it that I threw the poor plaster mouldings into the coal-scuttle, broken. And I thought: I’ll draw from plaster casts when you lot become whole and white again and there are no longer any hands and feet of living people to draw. I then said to Mauve, old chap, don’t speak to me of plaster casts any more, because I can’t stand it. In reply to this, a note from Mauve saying he’d have nothing to do with me for two months. He did indeed have nothing to do with me for those two months, but in that time I wasn’t sitting still, though I can assure you I wasn’t drawing from plaster casts and, I must say, worked with more spirit and passion once I was free. When the two months were more or less up, I wrote to him to congratulate him on his large painting that was finished, and spoke to him once very briefly in the street. Now the two months are long over, but he hasn’t been to see me yet. And things have happened since with H.G.T. which have prompted me to say to M., let’s shake hands and not bear a grudge or any bitterness towards one another, but it’s too difficult for you to guide me and too difficult for me to be guided by you if you demand ‘strict obedience’ in everything you say and I’m unable to comply. So there’s an end to guiding and being guided. That does nothing to diminish my feeling of obligation and gratitude towards you. Mauve didn’t reply to this, and I haven’t seen him.
   What drove me to say to M., we must go our separate ways, was that I had proof that Tersteeg had in fact influenced M. I gleaned it from H.G.T. himself, when he told me that he would see to it that the money you sent me was cut: ‘Mauve and I will make sure that a stop is put to it’. I then wrote H.G.T. a less friendly letter than the first one – making sure to thank him for his help in ‘guiding’ me. I then simply told him how I felt, Theo, because you see, I remembered that on that first evening when I recognized one of H.G.T.’s expressions, Mauve wouldn’t admit to having seen him. And I thought: So, Tersteeg, are these your ‘manners’, first of all whispering something venomous in Mauve’s ear and then trying to take from me the only income I have? I didn’t know that such things are called ‘good manners’, I thought it was BETRAYAL. Theo, I’m a man with faults and miseries and emotions, but I don’t think I’ve ever tried to rob anyone of his means of subsistence or to undermine his friends. Sometimes I’ve battled with someone verbally but, you see, in my opinion no honest man interferes in someone else’s life because of a difference of opinion, at any rate those aren’t honest weapons. Do you understand now why I’m sometimes sad about many things, sad to the depths of my soul? And that I really won’t go to Mauve or Tersteeg, not even if it’s suggested that I beg their pardon. Because as far as Mauve is concerned, why didn’t he say, as he did in the beginning when Tersteeg laughed about my becoming a painter: stay out of it, because you don’t know as much about these things as I do. At first he did that, as I heard from Weissenbruch. And you see, Theo, that’s why it hurts me about Mauve, because even though I wouldn’t want to have any more of such ‘guidance’, I would in fact like to shake his hand again, and wish he wanted to do the same. Do you perhaps know something about this that I don’t? Could you perhaps enlighten me on this subject? Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent Forgive me for bothering you with this, but you see, I’m so much in the dark. In a case of differing views on artistic matters it is, in my opinion, not fair to rob someone of his means of subsistence or attempt to turn his friends against him for reasons relating to his private life. I once wanted to reprimand someone who often received bread from me. No, I thought, I’ll endure it from him, because otherwise he’ll have nothing to eat. You understand, but people with certain manners see things like that differently. I have another drawing of a female figure like Sorrow only larger4 and, I believe, better than the first. And I’m working on a drawing of a street in which the sewerage or the water pipes are being dug up, i.e. diggers in a hole. Breitner is still in hospital and will have to stay there another month perhaps. Theo, Since I wrote to Mauve ‘do you realize that those two months are long past, let’s shake hands and go our separate ways rather than quarrel’, I say, since I wrote such a thing and received no sign of life in return, it’s as though something has been choking me. Because – and you know this – I do love Mauve, and it’s so awful that nothing much will come of all that happiness he held out to me. For I fear that the better I draw the more trouble and opposition I’ll encounter. Because I’ll have to suffer greatly for various idiosyncrasies that I cannot change. First of all, my appearance and manner of speaking and clothing, and also because later, when I’m earning more, I’ll continue to live in a different sphere from most other painters, because my view of things, the subjects I want to depict, inevitably demand it. Enclosed is a little sketch of Diggers, I’ll tell you why I’m enclosing it: Tersteeg says to me: ‘Things didn’t go well for you earlier either, and it was a failure, and now it’s the same all over again’. Stop right there – no, it’s wholly different from before, and that line of reasoning is in fact fallacious. That I wasn’t suited to commerce or professional studies in no way proves that I’d also be unfit to be a painter. On the contrary, if I were fit to be a clergyman or a dealer selling the work of others, perhaps I wouldn’t have been fit for painting and drawing, and wouldn’t have both handed in and been given my notice as such. 
   It’s precisely because I have a draughtsman’s fist that I can’t keep myself from drawing and, I ask you, have I ever doubted or hesitated or wavered since the day I began to draw? I think you know very well that I’ve hacked my way through and am obviously ever more keen to do battle. Coming back to that little sketch – it was made in the Geest district2 in the drizzle, standing in a street in the mud, in all that bustle and noise, and I’m sending it to show you that my sketchbook proves that I try to capture things first-hand. Put Iterson or H.G.T. himself, for example, in front of a sandpit in the Geest district where the dredgers are at work laying a water or gas pipe – I’d like to see the kind of face someone like that would pull and what kind of sketch he’d make. Struggling on wharves and in alleys and streets and inside houses, waiting rooms, even public houses, that’s not a nice job, unless one is an artist. As such one would rather be in the filthiest neighbourhood, provided there’s something to draw, than at a tea party with nice ladies. Unless one draws ladies, in which case a tea party is nice even for an artist. I only mean to say that looking for subjects, frequenting the labourers, the struggle and worry with models, drawing from nature and on the spot, is all rough work – sometimes even filthy work, and truly, the manners and clothing of a shop assistant aren’t exactly the most appropriate for me or anyone else who doesn’t have to speak to beautiful ladies and wealthy gentlemen and sell them expensive things and earn money,a but instead draws diggers in a pit in the Geest district, for instance. If I could do what H.G.T. or Iterson can, if I were suited to it, I wouldn’t be fit for my profession, and for my profession it’s better that I am as I am than that I force myself to adopt manners that wouldn’t fit me. 
         I – who wasn’t at ease in a reasonably good coat in a respectable shop and no longer could be, especially now, and would most likely be bored and be a bore – am a completely different person when I’m working in the Geest district, say, or on the heath or in the dunes. Then my ugly face and my weather-stained jacket are perfectly in keeping with my surroundings, and I’m myself and work with pleasure. Whatever the ‘How to do it’4 entails, I hope to battle on. If I wear a nice coat, the workers I need as models are distrustful and fear me like the devil, or else they want a lot of money from me. Now I’m struggling along as I see fit, and it seems to me I’m not one of those who complain that ‘there are no models in The Hague’. So if remarks are made about my manners in the sense of clothing, face, manner of speaking, what shall I say in reply  – – –  that such talk bores me. Am I then someone without manners in another sense, namely rude or tactless? Look, in my opinion all civility is based on kindness towards everyone, especially towards those we know – based on the need felt by anyone with a heart in his breast to mean something to others and to be of some use – on the need one ultimately has to live with others and not alone. It’s for that that I do my best, I draw not to annoy people but to amuse them, or to draw their attention to things that are worth looking at and which not everyone knows. I refuse to believe, Theo, that I’m such a monster of rudeness or incivility as to deserve to be cut off from society or, in the words of Tersteeg at any rate, ‘be unable to remain in The Hague’. 
   Do I lower myself by living with the people I draw, do I lower myself by frequenting the houses of workers and poor people or by receiving them in my studio? It seems to me that my profession involves that, and only those who understand nothing of painting or drawing are entitled to find fault with it. I ask this: where do the draughtsmen for The Graphic, Punch &c. get their models? Do they or don’t they go themselves to round them up in the poorest alleyways of London? And the knowledge they have of the people, is it innate – or did they acquire it later in life by living among the people and by paying attention to things that most people walk right past, by remembering what many forget? When I go to see Mauve or Tersteeg, I can’t express myself as I’d like, and perhaps I do more harm than good. When they get used to my manner of speaking, it won’t bother them. But, if you will, tell them from me how matters stand, that if I said or did anything to hurt them, I hope they’ll forgive me. Tell them, in better words than I can find and with the necessary civility, how they, for their part, caused me much pain, much sorrow, much trouble in the few short months which these unpleasantnesses have made so long. Make them understand this, because they don’t know it, they take me to be insensitive and indifferent. And by doing so you’ll be doing me a big favour, and I believe that everything can be settled in this way. I wish they’d simply accept me as I am. Mauve has been good to me and has given me considerable and unstinting help, but –  it lasted a fortnight. That's too short. Adieu Theo – do your best in this affair – if I have a bit of good fortune here instead of misfortune, I won’t have to make life difficult for you, and now enough, believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
   You’ve no doubt heard of Pa’s calling5 and that Ma’s better again, but Uncle Cent is ill. I’m working on the drawings for C.M., but I’ve been so depressed these days by what I wrote to you that it’s torn me away from my work, and then I thought, some light must be shed on the matter, perhaps Theo can enlighten me. It’s no wonder that it depressed me, because 
  Tersteeg already told me ‘that I wouldn’t be able to remain in The Hague’, and I thought, he’s just the kind of person who, if he puts his mind to it, will thwart me and try to cripple me every step of the way. But how on earth is it possible, and what has come over them? If he thinks my drawings aren’t good, is that any reason for such resolute opposition, with whichever weapons? 
    
    My dear Theo, My reply to your statement, ‘Tersteeg has been almost like an elder brother to us, be sure and stay friends with him’, whereupon I said that even if that were so as far as you were concerned, I personally had been confronted with his unfriendly and hard side for years – I’d like to elaborate on this a little. In all those years between the time I both handed in and was given my notice at Goupil’s2 and the moment I finally started to draw (which – and I admit that this was a mistake on my part – I should have done straightaway), in those years, when I was abroad without friends or assistance, in great misery (so that I often had to sleep in the streets in London, and in the Borinage 3 nights in a row), did he ever give me a piece of bread? Did he ever put courage into me, he who had known me for donkey’s years, or give me fresh heart when I’d nearly given up? I think not. Did he ever help me with this or that – no. Except for lending me the Bargues, after I had literally begged him for them no less than 4 times. When I sent him my first drawings he sent me a box of paints4 – but no money at all. I’m willing to believe that those first drawings weren’t worth anything, but look, someone like Tersteeg could have thought, I’ve known him for such a long time and I want to help him out, and he could have understood that I was so badly in need of it and do indeed have to eat. When I wrote to him from Brussels, ‘wouldn’t it be possible for me to work for a while in The Hague and mix with painters?’, he tried to fob me off and wrote to me, oh no, surely not, you’ve lost your rights. I’d do better to go and teach English and French. Of this he was certain: I was no artist. Or do copying work for Smeeton and Tilly, which wasn’t exactly near by, and I was turned down by various lithographers in Brussels: there wasn’t any work, there was nothing doing, that’s what they said. When I showed him some drawings again last summer, he said: I hadn’t expected this – but he didn’t help me, and wasn’t at all inclined to take back what he’d said. 
   When I came to The Hague anyway, without asking His Hon.’s advice, he tried to trip me up, I heard that he laughed at my becoming a painter, I noticed that until then Mauve had considered me ‘a bloody bore’, and Mauve was amazed that I was a different person from the one he’d heard about. I didn’t ask Mauve for money, but Mauve said of his own accord, you need money, I’ll make sure you earn some – you can count on your bad years being over and on the sun rising for you, you’ve worked for it and earned it honestly. And, to begin with, Mauve helped me to settle in. But all of that changed – Mauve’s sympathy, which was to me as water to a half-withered plant, dried up. Because Tersteeg whispered something venomous in Mauve’s ear: Watch out – he can’t be trusted with money – drop him – don’t help him any more – as an art dealer I don’t see any point in it – or at any rate something in this vein. And pretended to know nothing when I said: Tersteeg, you must tone down your talk a bit; he said nothing. I was just imagining it, he said. Until one fine day he threatened me: Mauve and I will see to it that you receive no more money from Theo I no longer doubted it, and thought, you’re betraying me. 
   Because I knew what Mauve himself had said to me about it, namely that it would be very good if I could continue to receive that money from you for at least another year. When one forsakes someone in the winter, and even tries to rob him of his bread, is that coercion or not? It’s inconsiderate, insensitive, those aren’t manners, it’s not humane. And who am I – someone with difficult, painstaking work that demands peace and quiet and some sympathy, otherwise my work is impossible. Theo, think about these things and write to me soon. Even though I was terribly grieved that Mauve left me in the lurch, I’ve battled on this winter as best I could. But is it any wonder that I’m shaken by it and sometimes feel as though my heart is failing? The likes of Tersteeg ‘laugh’ about it – but you are my brother and I hope you won’t laugh about it. I have more to tell you about my plans for the future, how I intend to continue my work. You must come here first, though, so I’m not writing about that now, seeing as you won’t, I hope, be staying away very much longer. You’ve seen the two drawings I sent you. They didn’t turn out like that by chance; I could deliver such work regularly and it will gradually get better. So it’s not unreasonable for me to urge you to arrange it so that I no longer have to fear that the most necessary things will be taken from me, or always have the feeling that it’s charity.
   The most necessary things are bread, clothing, rent, models, drawing materials. And it’s not such a tremendous amount, the way I go about it – and I can make drawings in return, provided someone wants them. I don’t desire wealth, but of course I can’t stand the thought of not having the most necessary things. A workman is worth his wages. I wish it could be arranged for me to receive the money weekly, because it’s so difficult to calculate a month ahead. If Tersteeg takes back the most awful things he said, I’m willing to assume that he said them in a moment of thoughtlessness, and then it’s forgive and forget.  If he stands by them, I’ll consider him an enemy who can’t stand the sight of me, rather than a friend. Don’t blame me, Theo, for bothering you with this, but it’s been going on now the whole winter, and what have I done to deserve all this frustration? All that fear and sorrow cannot but make one agitated and nervous in speech and manner, and if Mauve imitates and parrots me, saying ‘that’s the face you pull’, this is how you talk, I’ll reply: My dear fellow, if you had spent damp nights in the streets of London or cold nights in the Borinage as I have done, hungry, roofless, feverish, perhaps you’d also have the occasional ugly tic, and something in your voice, to show for it. Adieu, Theo, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent It’s been impossible for me to make the townscapes for C.M., because of all the rain and wind. So I don’t have the money for them yet either. The rent is due on 1 May, so anything I receive around 1 May will be welcome. My dear Theo, I received your letter with the enclosed 100 francs and thank you most sincerely for it. Your letter enlightened me more than all my worrying and fretting about the question of Mauve and HGT. I compliment you on it, because now I believe I understand it better. And, if I understand correctly, what I have to do is go on working calmly without dwelling on it or taking it to heart as much as I did. If I dwell on it, I have the same feeling of dizziness which, you say, someone who hasn’t studied perspective feels when he tries to follow the receding lines in nature and give an account of them. And I believe that just as the whole perspective changes with a change in eye level, which depends not on the objects but on the man viewing them (whether he stoops or stands on top of something), so too the change in Mauve and H.G.T. is in part only an outward seeming and can be explained by my own mood. I don’t see these affairs clearly, but I think I see plainly from your letter that there’s no reason for me to be overly concerned about it if only I go on working. And now enough about it, because there are other things to write. Heyerdahl’s sympathy moved me deeply, will you give him my regards and say that I hope very much to make his acquaintance some day, and that I set great store by it. I’ve now finished two larger drawings. First of all, Sorrow, but in a larger format, the figure alone without surroundings. But the pose has been altered somewhat, the hair doesn’t hang down the back but to the front, part of it in a plait. This brings the shoulder, the neck and back into view. And the figure has been drawn with more care. The other one, ‘Roots’, is some tree roots in sandy ground. I’ve tried to imbue the landscape with the same sentiment as the figure. Frantically and fervently rooting itself, as it were, in the earth, and yet being half torn up by the storm. I wanted to express something of life’s struggle, both in that white, slender female figure and in those gnarled black roots with their knots. Or rather, because I tried without any philosophizing to be true to nature, which I had before me, something of that great struggle has come into both of them almost inadvertently. At least it seemed to me that there was some sentiment in it, though I may be mistaken, anyway, you’ll have to see for yourself. 
   If you see something in them, perhaps they’ll be suitable for your new home, and then I’ll have made them for your birthday, on which I congratulate you. But because they’re rather large (1 whole sheet of Ingres), I don’t know if I should send them straightaway. Let me know. Perhaps H.G.T. would find it impertinent or priggish if I asked him to pack them in a crate as a return shipment. Although Roots is only a ‘pencil’ drawing, it has been brushed in and scraped off, the same as one paints. As regards the carpenter’s pencil, my reasoning is as follows. The old masters, what would they have drawn with? Certainly not with Faber B, BB, BBB, &c. &c., but with a rough piece of graphite. The implement Michelangelo and Dürer used was perhaps very similar to a carpenter’s pencil. But I wasn’t there and don’t know. This I do know, that with a carpenter’s pencil one can achieve intensities differently than with those fine Fabers &c. I like graphite better in its natural form than cut too fine in those expensive Fabers. And the shininess disappears by fixing it with milk. If one sits outdoors and works with Conté, one can’t really tell what one’s doing because of the bright light and notices that it’s become too black, but graphite is more grey than black, and one can always obtain a couple of extra octaves by working it over with the pen, so that the strongest intensities of graphite actually lighten up through the repoussoir of the pen. Charcoal is best, but if one works with it too long it loses its freshness, and to keep the subtlety one has to fix those spots. For landscapes as well, I see that such draughtsmen as Ruisdael, Van Goyen8 and Calame, Roelofs10 too, among the moderns, used it to great advantage. But if someone invented a good pen to work with outdoors, with accompanying inkwell, perhaps more pen drawings would be made. One can do wonderful things with charcoal that has been soaked in oil, I’ve seen this from Weissenbruch. The oil is then the fixative, and the black becomes warmer and deeper. But I imagine it would be better for me to do that in a year and not now, because I want the fine appearance to come from me and not from my material. When I’m a bit further along I’ll put on a nice suit now and then, meaning I’ll work with rewarding drawing materials. And provided I myself am capable of doing something, I’ll make twice as much progress, and perhaps it will prove easier than expected. But first, before any success, hand-to-hand combat with the things in nature. 
   Last year I wrote you a great many letters telling you what I thought about love. I’m not doing so now, because I’m busy putting those same things into practice. The person for whom I felt what I wrote to you is not on my path, is beyond my reach, despite all my longing for her. Would I have done better to go on thinking of her and to overlook what came my way? I cannot decide whether I’m acting consistently or inconsistently. Suppose I were to start today on a drawing of a digger, for example – but the man says, I have to leave and won’t or can’t pose again – I don’t have the right to blame him for leaving me there with a barely sketched drawing, the more so because I started to draw him without asking permission. Must I then give up drawing a digger? I think not, especially not if tomorrow I encounter one who says, I want to come not only today but also tomorrow and the day after, and I understand what you need, go ahead, I’m patient and have the good will to do it. To be sure, I didn’t stick exactly to my first impression, but would I have done better to reason: no, I definitely need that first digger, even if he says, I can’t and won’t? And once I’ve started on No. 2, then I may certainly not work without reference to the nature standing before me, thinking the while of No. 1. That’s how things stand. And concerning that, I add this to my previous letter. In order for me to succeed, you’ll have to help me a bit, but I believe the expense would be not more but less than what you’ve been sending me these last few months. I’d be willing and daring enough to embark on this undertaking if I could count on 150 francs a month for another year. I do hope in that case to earn something as well, but if that were to fail I’d be able to scrape by anyway, though admittedly in straitened circumstances. And then later – when that year has passed? It seems to me that there’s nothing in my work to indicate that I won’t succeed, provided I plough on and continue to make an effort. And I’m not one to work slowly or fretfully. Drawing is becoming a passion with me, and I’m becoming increasingly absorbed in it, and where there is a will is a way.b 13
   Where is a will is a way,c but that has to come from both sides. For me the will must be the making of things, and for those who have or may acquire sympathy for me, the will is selling or buying those things. The will being there, I think the way can be found. But if everyone reasoned like H.G.T. – ‘unsaleable’, ‘disagreeable’ – then I’d be confronted with a mountain of trouble. Oh well – be that as it may – I’ll put more effort into my work to defeat the disagreeable and unsaleable. There’s been a terrible storm here for 3 nights running. In the night from Saturday to Sunday the window of my studio gave out. (The house where I live is very dilapidated.) 4 large panes broken and the window wrenched loose. You can imagine this wasn’t all. The wind came sailing over the flat pastures directly at my window. The fence below was also knocked down, the drawings ripped from the wall, the easel on the floor. I nevertheless tied the window down with my neighbour’s help, and nailed up a woollen blanket against the opening, certainly a □ metre15 in size. Didn’t sleep a wink the whole night, as you can imagine. And lots of trouble to fix it because it was Sunday. The landlord is a poor pedlar, he gave me the glass, I paid for the work. All the more reason why I’m thinking of moving next door. There’s an upstairs flat like this:  The studio is larger than mine, the light very good. There’s an attic, completely panelled over, so that one doesn’t see the roof tiles. Extremely large, where one can partition off as many rooms as one likes (and I have the planks to do it). Rent 12. guilders a month, a strong, well-built house, but it won’t bring in any more, because it’s ‘only in Schenkweg’ and the rich people the owner17 had hoped for won’t come here. I’d like it very much, and the owner would like to have me rent it; he spoke to me about it first and then I went to see it. And now I’ll finish by saying that I assure you I think about home a great deal, and am of the opinion that half a year from now, if the matter about which I wrote to you has been undertaken and Pa and Ma come to visit me, it would result in a change of feeling on both sides. Unfortunately, though, now is not the time, we have to get things started first. Because Pa and Ma, whom I consider to be lay people in the circumstances, will think it very nice if it’s more finished (Belgian merchants say more finessed, according to Mauve), but the rough sketch, which you’d understand if you’d been here, would make them dizzy at the very least. Adieu – I wish you the best. Ever yours, Vincent 
   If you’re coming soon, I won’t send the drawings. But it’s time you started to get things from me, I’ll do my best, and if you like these two, for example, you’ll get many more and of all kinds. If you show the ones you find suitable to the people who come to your room, perhaps that would be the beginning of selling them, and particularly when a number of them are shown together, and various ones by the same hand, they draw attention to one another, and the one complements and explains the other. What I value most is your sympathy. If I positively win that, the selling will follow. But neither I nor you must force that sympathy. I believe I can produce a great deal, I mean, work rapidly and not waste time. And if I’ve sent you another couple, since you sent back the old studies as I asked you to do18 (the Laan van Meerdervoort and Sorrow), it’s to give you a sign that I can make more of the same if you’d like. If you say they aren’t ready, I’ll go on working before sending more, because what I sent isn’t something accidental: what I can do, I can do. I must go on working for a time to make even more progress. But I want to say this: if the last batch I sent proves to have anything you could begin showing to people, I could start to send you things as soon as I have something. What you considered good would then have to be put into grey mounts, and a portfolio would gradually take shape in this way. Think about it. I have another drawing of an old man by the fireplace, ‘the boarder’, an old woman from the Geest district, a couple of female figures23 which I think would go well with the others. Also small sketches. I’m not saying this to make you hurry, but it can’t do any harm to think it over. 
   You started helping me without knowing what would come of it, and when others wouldn’t. I do hope that one day you’ll be able to say calmly to those who think it’s foolish of you to help me that you haven’t lost anything by it. And that stimulates me all the more, and I think you should start by taking a few drawings, and every month there will be more. There are days when I make 5, but with drawings you must count on 1 in 20 succeeding. That 1 in 20 is no longer an accident, though, I can count on that. There will probably be 1 every week about which I feel ‘that will remain’. For the time being it’s better for you to keep the ones that ‘will remain’ than for me to give them to someone here for 10 guilders or so, and then only by the grace of God and as a great favour. Here everyone criticizes the technique, but I also hear the same platitudes from everyone about English drawings, for example. Weissenbruch alone said, when I told him that I see the things as pen drawings – then you must draw with the pen. He, namely Weiss., saw the large rather than the small Sorrow, and he said things about it that pleased me. That’s why I dare to say what I say about the large one. I’ve had no ‘guidance’, no ‘instruction’ from others, but have taught myself, as it were, so it’s no wonder that on the face of it my way of doing things differs from that of others. But that’s no reason for my work to remain unsaleable. I’ll wager that the large Sorrow, the woman from the Geest district, the boarder and others too, if you will, will indeed find a buyer one day. But it could well be that I’ll work on them again later. I’ve even worked again on the Laan van Meerdervoort. I have a female figure in a black merino frock in front of me, and I’m certain that if you had it for a few days you would become reconciled to its manner and wouldn’t wish it had been done differently. I didn’t understand English drawings either at first, as little as any other foreigner, but ‘I took the trouble to become acquainted with them’25 and haven’t regretted it. Adieu, enough for today. This day I have sent to you by book-post 1 drawing, ‘A root in a dry ground’. You just let me know what you think of it. Roots2 is very similar to this one but I can’t sent that one neither ‘Sorrow’3 in this manner on a roller, the drawings being mounted on cardboard. With regard to this one I hammered it off in a single day, having studied the same spot and trees for Roots. So it’s been done ‘in one go’ out of doors and hasn’t even been in my studio. But the paper has been slightly damaged in 2 or 3 places as I worked through it, please have this seen to at once, else it might get worse. I think it wants a grey mount. Good bye, hope to hear of you at yr early convenience. Vincent Tuesday evening I give you leave to say what you like to Mauve about the contents of this letter, but it doesn’t have to go any further. My dear Theo, Today I met Mauve and had a very regrettable conversation with him which made it clear to me that Mauve and I have parted ways for ever. Mauve has gone so far that he can’t retract it, or at least certainly wouldn’t want to. I asked him to come and see my work and talk things over afterwards. Mauve refused outright, ‘I certainly won’t come to see you, it’s over and done with’. In the end he said, ‘you have a vicious character’. At that point I turned around – it was in the dunes – and walked home alone. Mauve blames me for saying, I’m an artist1 – which I won’t take back, because those words naturally imply always seeking without ever fully finding. It’s the exact opposite of saying, ‘I know it already, I’ve already found it’. 
   To the best of my knowledge, those words mean ‘I seek, I pursue, my heart is in it’. I do have ears, Theo – if someone says ‘you have a vicious character’, what should I do? I turned around and went back alone, but with great sorrow in my heart because Mauve dared to say that to me. I won’t ask him to explain such a thing to me, nor will I apologize. And yet – and yet – and yet. I wish that Mauve regretted it. People suspect me of something... it’s in the air... I must be hiding something... Vincent is keeping something back that may not be divulged.. Well, gentlemen, I’ll tell you – you who set great store by manners and culture, and rightly so, provided it’s the real thing – what is more cultured, more sensitive, more manly: to forsake a woman or to take on a forsaken one?
   This winter I met a pregnant woman, abandoned by the man whose child she was carrying. A pregnant woman who roamed the streets in winter – who had to earn her bread, you can imagine how. I took that woman as a model and worked with her the whole winter. I couldn’t give her a model’s full daily wage, but all the same, I paid her rent and have until now been able, thank God, to preserve her and her child from hunger and cold by sharing my own bread with her. When I met this woman, she caught my eye because she looked ill. I made her take baths and as much fortifying remedies as I could afford, she’s become much healthier. I went with her to Leiden, where there’s a maternity hospital4 she’ll go to for her confinement. No wonder she was ill, the child was the wrong way round and she had to have an operation, which entailed turning the child with forceps. Still, there’s a good chance that she’ll come through it all right. She’ll have the baby in June. It seems to me that any man worth the leather his shoes are made of would have done the same in such circumstances. 
   I find what I did so simple and natural that I thought I could keep it to myself. She found posing difficult, but she learned it anyway. I’ve progressed with my drawing by having a good model. This woman is now attached to me like a tame dove – for my part, I can marry only once, and when would be a better time to do it than with her, because only by doing so can I continue to help her, and otherwise hardship will make her take the same road that ends in the abyss. She has no money, but she helps me to earn money in my work. I’m full of enthusiasm and ambition for my profession and work, if I left off painting and making watercolours for a while, it’s because I was so shaken by Mauve’s forsaking me, and if he really were to reconsider, I’d begin again with courage. As it is, I can’t even look at a brush, it makes me nervous. I wrote: Theo, can you enlighten me as to Mauve’s attitude6 – perhaps this letter will enlighten you. You’re my brother, it’s natural that I speak to you about private matters, but someone who says to me, you have a vicious character, I stop speaking to him from that very moment. I couldn’t do otherwise, I did what the hand found to do, I worked. I thought I would be understood without words. I was in fact thinking of another woman for whom my heart beats – but she was far away and didn’t want to see me, and this one – there she was, ill, pregnant, hungry – in the winter. I couldn’t do otherwise. Mauve, Theo, Tersteeg, you all have my livelihood in your hands, will you leave me penniless or turn your backs on me – now I’ve spoken and shall wait to hear what's said to me. Vincent 
   I’m sending you a couple of studies, because perhaps you’ll see from them that she helps me greatly by posing. My drawings are ‘by my model and me’. The one with the white cap is her mother. Considering, however, that in a year, when I’ll probably be working very differently, I’ll have to base myself on the studies I’m making now as conscientiously as I possibly can, I’d like to have these three back in any case. You see that they’ve been made with care. If I later have an interior or a waiting room or some such thing, these will be of use to me because I’ll have to consult them for the details. But I thought it might be good for you to know how I spend my time. These studies demand a rather dry technique, if I’d concentrated here on the effect they’d be less useful to me later on. But I think you’ll understand this yourself. The paper I’d actually like to have most is the kind on which the female figure is drawn bending forwards, but if possible of the colour of unbleached linen. I have no more of it in that thickness, I believe one calls it double Ingres. I can’t get any more of it here. When you see how that drawing is done, you’ll understand that the thin kind can barely take it. I wanted to include a small figure in black merino, but I can’t roll it. The chair by the large figure isn’t finished because I’d like to put an old oak chair there. My dear Theo. If I said things in my last letter about her that are rather sombre, it’s because I wanted to point out from the beginning that I’m not living in a bed of roses but in reality. And to protest in advance against sentimental considerations of the kind Pa and Ma wouldn’t fail to suggest, if I were to ask their advice or merely to inform them of the matter. Sentiment and sentimentality are two very different things which they are unable to distinguish from one another. And if I were to speak of it, Pa would most likely think he had to play the part of policeman, which would be completely inappropriate and of little use. So you’ll excuse me if I don’t breathe a word of this to Pa and Ma, and have no desire for them to interfere. If Pa refused to give his consent, there are legal provisions that guarantee me, as an adult, my independence, but I don’t think that Pa will go so far as to oppose it. People will say, ‘you’re lowering yourself and you’re too poor’. To which I reply, If I were intending to set up house in style, it would end badly. If I go to live in a house consisting of a studio, 1 room and a little kitchen, a sleeping place in the attic, and, as regards my way of life, go about things very simply, it can be done, and two people living together need less than one alone. One is certain of sinking separately, only together can one be saved. I asked Kee Vos if she would chance it with me. You know how I was refused, the only thing I asked for after that was to be received during my visit to Amsterdam. At that time I was told that I wanted to force the matter – she wouldn’t see me, wouldn’t speak to me, not only upon that one visit but during the 3 days of my stay there.
   If I’m told ‘you want to force the matter’, the only ones who say that, Theo, are those who completely misunderstand me. As proof that at the time I didn’t want to force the matter, I now do something which proves that I wasn’t confronting Kee Vos as one who wanted to force her. The woman I’m with now understands me better. In a short time she became as gentle as a tame dove, certainly not by force on my part but because she saw that I wasn’t rough. Anyway, this one understood, and she said to me, I know you don’t have much money, but if you had even less, I’d do anything if only you’d stay with me and let me stay with you, I’m too attached to you to be capable of being alone again. When someone says this to me and shows in everything that she means it, much more through actions than words, it’s no wonder that in front of her I dropped the mask of coolness, and roughness almost, which I’ve long worn because I didn’t want to cajole. Now then, is this woman worse off or am I worse off because it turned out this way? I’m amazed at the sight of her getting stronger and more cheerful every day, she’s so changed that she seems like a completely different person from the sick, pale woman I met this winter. And yet, I haven’t done much for her, I only said to her: do this, do that and you’ll get better – and she didn’t disregard it, and when I noticed that she didn’t disregard it, I tried even harder to do my best. I was perhaps more able than others to understand her, because she has a couple of peculiar habits that many would find repellent. 
   First of all, her speech, which is ugly and which is the result of her illness, then her temper, which stems from a nervous disposition, causing her to have moods that many would find unbearable. I understand these things, they don’t bother me, and until now I’ve been able to deal with them. And for her part, she understands my own temper, and we have a tacit agreement, as it were, not to carp at each other. If you know the large drawing from The Graphic by Frank Holl, ‘The deserter’, I’d say she closely resembles the female figure in it. She’s learning to pose better every day, and that’s extremely important to me. She isn’t a burden, a millstone round my neck; instead, she helps and works with me. She has no pretensions, I’ve got to have things just this way or that, and if there’s nothing but bread and coffee she makes do with that without complaining. But Theo, I’m longing to see you and talk to you. I’m also very much looking forward to a letter from you. If I knew that you wouldn’t turn away from me for this reason, I’d be as happy as a person can be. It’s true that I’ll need some help in the beginning. If I had to do without it, I’d be badly off and so would she, but that help amounts to no more than is necessary for me alone. And my energy is increasing, and when I’ve done my best to succeed (naturally such a thing is now the case more than ever), and precisely by being able to count on your help and cooperation for a while longer, I’ll succeed to the extent that I’ll earn what’s necessary by selling my work.
   The first step I’d like to take is to rent the studio next door, which I wrote to you about. As soon as she returns from Leiden I’ll marry her without telling anyone about it, quietly and without any fuss. And then we’ll be able to manage with that house and are prepared to live as simply as possible. And if you were able to come and have a look, I believe you’d see that you can rely on both of us doing our best as regards work. I only wish her confinement were already over. That will be an ordeal for her. But until now everything has been all right, since she’s been to Leiden. Still, neither she nor I are living on a bed of roses or dreaming in the moonlight, we’re facing hard things – so much the better. What I sincerely hope is that you won’t take this pessimistically. Obviously if Kee Vos had in any way reciprocated the feelings I had for her this wouldn’t have happened. Well, during my visit to Amsterdam, I was refused so resolutely that I didn’t have the slightest chance of winning her. Unless my financial circumstances were to change quickly and completely. Which won’t happen now, because even though I’ll eventually earn enough for this one to live with me, it won’t be so much that I can afford to occupy a station in life for which, moreover, I feel no calling or desire. You know what I’m seeking, the barest essentials, but anything more rather leaves me cold. What I’d like to have is a weekly wage like any other labourer, for which I’d work with all my might and powers of reason. And being a labourer, I belong to the working class and shall live and put down roots in that sphere more and more. I can’t do anything else and I have no desire to do anything else, I can’t imagine anything else. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Today I sent off a few drawings and sketches for you;1 what I want to show you above all else is that what I told you about doesn’t mean that I’m easing off on my work, on the contrary. I’m literally engrossed in my work and take pleasure in it, and am in good spirits. Now I hope that you won’t blame me for being a little worried because you haven’t given me answers to various things. I don’t believe you’ll think ill of me for being with Christien. I don’t believe that you’ll abandon me altogether for that or any other reason of etiquette or whatever. But is it any wonder that after what happened with Mauve and H.G.T. I sometimes think with a certain melancholy, perhaps it’s happened with him as well? At any rate, I’m very much looking forward to a letter from you, though I know that you’re doubtless very busy and that it hasn’t been so very long since you last wrote. Perhaps you’ll experience it yourself sooner or later, but during days in which one is one with a pregnant woman, so to speak, there’s so much to worry about that 24 hours is sometimes a week and a week seems longer than a month. And that’s why I’ve written to you so often these last few days, as long as I have no reply. I wrote to you about my plan to rent the house next door as being more suitable than this one, which appears capable of being blown apart &c. 
   But after all, you know very well that I don’t ask arrogantly for this or that. I only hope that you’ll continue to be what you were to me, I don’t think I’ve lowered or dishonoured myself by doing what I did, although some will perhaps think so. I feel that my work lies in the heart of the people, that I must keep close to the ground, that I must delve deeply into life and must get ahead by coping with great cares and difficulties. I can’t imagine any other way, and I don’t ask to be without difficulties or cares, only that they don’t become unbearable, I hope, and that doesn’t have to be the case as long as I work and continue to have the sympathy of people like you. Life is the same as drawing: sometimes one has to act quickly and resolutely, tackle things with willpower, take care that the broad outlines appear with lightning speed. It’s no use hesitating or doubting, and the hand may not tremble and the eye may not wander but must remain fixed on one’s purpose. And one must be so engrossed in it that something quickly takes shape on the sheet of paper or the canvas, where at first there was nothing, so that later one hardly knows how one tossed it off. The time of reasoning and reflecting must precede the decisive action. While doing it there’s little space for reflecting or reasoning. 
   And acting quickly is a man’s work and before one is capable of it one must have experienced something. Sometimes a helmsman succeeds in making use of a gale to make headway instead of foundering because of it. What I wanted to say to you again is this. I don’t have any great plans for the future. Though I may have a fleeting desire for a life free of care, for good fortune – time and again I return lovingly to the difficulties, to the cares, to a difficult life – and think, it’s better like this, I learn more this way, I’m no worse a person for it, this isn’t the road to ruin. I’m engrossed in my work, and I’m confident that with a bit of good will from people like you, like Mauve, like Tersteeg, although we had a disagreement this winter, I’ll succeed in earning enough to live on – not in luxury but in the spirit of ‘thou shalt eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face’. Christien isn’t a millstone round my neck or a burden, but a help. If she were alone it’s possible that she’d go under; a woman shouldn’t be alone in a society and an age like the one we live in, which doesn’t spare the weak but tramples them underfoot and rides over them with wheels when a weak creature has fallen. This is why, because I see so many weak people downtrodden, I seriously doubt the genuineness of much of what one calls progress and civilization. I do believe in civilization, even in this day and age, but only in the kind that’s based on true love of humanity. Anything that costs human lives I find barbarous, and I have no respect for it. 
   Anyway, enough. If I could rent the house next door, if I could have a weekly allowance, it would be wonderful. If not, I won’t give up hope and shall wait a while longer. But if the first is possible, it would be so fortunate for me, and would give me more strength for my work that is otherwise absorbed by cares. You’ll see that the portfolio contains all kinds of things. Keep what appears to be the best of what I send, which you can then show if the occasion arises. The rest I’ll get back at your convenience. If I thought you’d come soon, I’d naturally keep these things until you came. Now, though, it’s perhaps good for you to see one thing and another together, and I hope you can tell that I’m not living a life of leisure at your expense. Viewing it superficially, you’d perhaps see this business with Christien in a completely different light from what it actually is. But now that I’ve told you what I said in this letter and the previous ones, it will seem less incomprehensible to you. I wish that those who wish me well understood that what I’m doing is prompted by a deep feeling of and need for love, that frivolity and arrogance and indifference are not the springs that drive the machine, and that if I take this step it’s proof that I’m taking root close to the ground. I don’t think I’d do well to strive for a higher station or to change much in my character. I must experience even more, must learn a lot more before I’ll be mature, but that’s a question of time and continuing to work. Adieu, write soon, if there’s anything to spare it certainly wouldn’t be ill-timed. Believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
   If I thought I could do someone or other a favour by moving away from The Hague, I’d prefer to go away rather than bother anyone, it doesn’t matter where. But I’m not doing anything to harm anyone, and after what you wrote to me I think I shouldn’t worry too much about what H.G.T. said. The house I wrote to you about is now to let and I’m afraid it will be gone if I don’t act quickly. All the more reason why I’m looking forward to your letter. Because you’ll understand, after what happened with Mauve and H.G.T. and after what I told you about Christien, 
       that I’m asking you frankly: Theo, do these things mean a change or separation between you and me? If not, I find it wonderful and am twice as happy as I was before to have your help and sympathy; if yes, then it’s better for me to know the worst than to live in uncertainty. I like to see what I’m up against, whether it be good fortune or ill fortune. 
   I have your answer regarding the business of Mauve and H.G.T., not about the other. The other is something entirely separate, there’s a boundary between the artistic and the intimate, but it’s good to agree frankly on how we see things. And that’s why I say: Theo, I intend to marry this woman, to whom I am attached and she to me. If this should unhappily result in a change of attitude towards me on your part, I hope that you won’t withdraw your help without warning me in advance, and that you’ll continue to tell me clearly and plainly what you think. 
   Naturally I hope that in no way will your help and sympathy come to an end, and that we’ll continue to hold out a brotherly hand to each other despite things ‘the world’ opposes. So, old chap, if you receive this and haven’t written yet, let me hear something by return of post, because after what I told you I need to be reassured or else to know the worst. Adieu. I hope that the air stays clear between you and me. My dear Theo, Having received your letter of 13 May, which must have crossed one from me to you, I think I should explain some things right away.  I indeed appreciate much of what I read in your letter, such as ‘One would have to be narrow-minded or have a misplaced sense of guilt to put one class absolutely above another.’2 The world, though, reasons otherwise, and never sees or respects the ‘human’ in the human being, but only the greater or smaller value in money or goods he bears this side of the grave. The world takes no account at all of the other side of the grave. This is why the world sees no further than the end of its nose. For my part I feel sympathy or antipathy for people as people, and care little about what they have around them. Yet to some extent I too take into consideration the points you make (and if my circumstances were such that I could do so, I would reconcile myself to more): ‘There are many who keep up a certain position to ensure that they won’t be constantly watched and that people won’t meddle in their affairs too much.’ I mean, very often I too let things pass, thinking I shan’t do or say this or that so as not to offend someone.  But in important, serious matters one shouldn’t let one’s actions be guided by public opinion or by one’s own passions. One must stick to the A.B.C. that is the foundation of all morality, ‘love thy neighbour as thyself’. Act in a way that you can account for to God. Do right and act loyally.
   Now I face Christien and reason like this: how would I feel if someone first helped me and then left me in the lurch? Wouldn’t I think... the person who behaves like that would have done better to leave me alone if he couldn’t go on to the end as he had begun. In fact he deceived me. The person who is the father of Christien’s4 child reasoned exactly in the spirit of your letter, Theo, and in my view utterly wrongly. He was very friendly to her but did not marry her, even when she was pregnant by him, for the sake of, so he said, his position and his family &c. Christien was young at the time and met him after her father’s death, didn’t know then what she knows now, and when that person died she was left alone with her child — deserted — with nothing. She had to take to the streets unwillingly, became ill, ended up in hospital in all sorts of misfortune... The behaviour of that person was guilty before God, yet in the eyes of the world he kept his position — ‘he had paid her’. But when he faced DEATH, would there have been no regret or remorse in him then??? Now it happens that in the world, as against the characters of people like him, there are characters like mine, for example. I care as little about the world as that person cared about what is right. The semblance of right was enough for him, the opinion of the world — I couldn’t care tuppence about that. What comes first with me is this. I do not want to deceive or abandon any woman. If a woman refuses to have anything to do with me, like Kee Vos — I don’t press her, however strong my feelings may be — then I turn back with desolation in the heart as soon as my ‘she and no other’6 is opposed by her ‘certainly not him’. I do not want to coerce and i do not want to abandon. Equally, I protest if people coerce or abandon me. 
   If I were married to a woman and I saw that she was also carrying on with another, I wouldn’t let myself be made a fool of, but I wouldn’t leave her until I had tried my utmost to reclaim her. So you see how I think about marriage, and that I take it seriously.  I met Christien, as you know, when she was pregnant, ill, in the cold — I was alone — I had just had that experience in Amsterdam I wrote to you about. I began it  though not immediately with marriage in mind – but when I got to know her better, it became clear to me that if I wanted to help her I would have to take a more serious approach. I then spoke candidly with her and said: this is what I think about one thing and another, this is how I see your position and mine. I’m poor – but I’m no seducer. Do you think you could get on with me or not? – otherwise that’s the end of it. Then she said, I want to stay with you, however poor you are. This is how we ended up where we are now. And now she’s soon going to Leiden, and immediately afterwards I would like to marry her without further ado. Because otherwise there will be something false in her position and in mine, which I would most decidedly prefer to avoid.  So I’m like a workman with a craft in which she is my help. You have my drawings, and during the first year at least my living and hers depend on you and on all those prepared to help me, because you can see that I’m doing my best in my work, and that drawing, and I believe painting too, is in me and is slowly coming out.
   Now, I do believe, Theo, that I’ve brought no shame on my family by what I’ve done – and I wish that my family were reconciled to it. Otherwise, we confront each other, and I say for my part: not for anyone’s sake will I abandon a woman to whom I am tied by a bond woven by mutual help and respect. I am reconciled to her past and she is reconciled to my past. If my family were to cast me out because I had seduced a woman, I would feel like a scoundrel if I had really done such a thing, but if I should be thwarted because I remain loyal to a woman to whom I’ve promised loyalty, I should despise my family. Not everyone is suited to being a painter’s wife – she’s willing, she learns as each day goes by. I understand oddities in her character that have repelled others. But H.G.T. would most probably think of her what he thinks of me and say... she’s an unpleasant character and there’s something disagreeable about her, and leave it at that. Needless to say, though, I have sufficient knowledge of the world and people to desire no more than that I shouldn’t be thwarted in marrying – and I hope that I shan’t want for my daily bread as long as I show that I’m doing my best in my work and hacking my way through to become a capable painter, or perhaps just a draughtsman. But I shan’t visit my family at home or anything like that, either alone or with her, but shall stay in the circles my work leads to naturally. That way no one can take offence, unless malicious people deliberately look for a stumbling block, which I hope won’t be the case.
   You’ll find me very willing, though, in everything I can do without being disloyal to Christien. I would truly like to know what you advise, for instance, as to where to live or something similar. If there are objections to my staying in The Hague, I’m not obliged to be loyal to The Hague. And I can create a place to work, wherever you like. Either in a village or in a town. The figures and landscape I find in front of me will always be interesting enough for me to do my best with them, so you needn’t hesitate to raise the matter. Of course it mustn’t be some kind of wardship, I made my feelings about that clear enough at the time of the Geel affair:9 that sort of thing would be utterly inappropriate. Yet the question of loyalty or disloyalty to Christien is something about which I feel ‘I must not break a promise of marriage’. If Kee Vos had been willing to listen to me this summer, she might not have fobbed me off so quickly in Amsterdam, and then matters would have taken a very different course.  Then, however, as you know, though I followed her to the end, though I went after her all the way to Amsterdam, I was unable to speak to her or to get any firm undertaking, anything I could rely on. Now the rapid pace of life presses and pushes, work and the advent of new things that I must tackle, and I will resolutely hold my own in the fierce struggle. Giving up is a thing of bygone years; acting and being alert is what I do, now that I’ve found my work and my métier.
   Thus in the main I think your letter is very wrong, but this may be because you haven’t thought it through, and I believe you’re better than that letter of yours this morning.  You speak of something that happened to you. I believe I remember something very vaguely, as if in a mist long ago.  If I remember rightly, you were acquainted with a girl from a lower class and you loved her and had slept with her. Now, I don’t know who she was, but I do know that you consulted Pa about it, and also discussed it with me. And that Pa made you promise something to do with marrying. I don’t know what exactly, but perhaps that you wouldn’t do such a thing without his permission while still a minor. The rest, what happened to the woman, I don’t know. As long as you were under age, Pa truly had the right to intervene, and I can understand such an action. Now the difference between your case and mine is that you and she were considerably younger than Christien and I, that in the first place, and secondly that your future and mine are different, in that I’ll be quietly working at a craft while you’ll hold a post which requires you to keep up a certain position.  This seems clear enough to me, and if you were right to obey then as a minor, I have the liberty, being of age, to say to Pa: this is a matter in which you cannot and may not coerce me.
   Now, you say that you don’t see what there is between Christien and me that makes it necessary for me to marry her. Now here’s how both Christien and I view this: we both want to have a very domestic life close together, and have need of each other every day in the work and are together daily. We don’t want to have anything false in our position, and believe that marrying is the only effective way of silencing the world and ensuring that people can’t accuse us of living together illicitly. If we did not marry, people could say this or that is in fact false – if we marry we’ll be very poor and shall give up any pretensions to a social position, but our deed will be right and honest. I believe you will understand this. If you say – Vincent, times will be hard and your cares will sometimes be terrible, then I answer, yes, brother, I know that very well, you’re right about that, but, old chap, what I would find worse than that would be the feeling inside: ‘You have treacherously abandoned the woman you met when she was pregnant and sick in the winter and pushed her back onto the cruel cobblestones’. That shall not be said of me, and you’ll see that it isn’t ‘pigheadedness’ or ‘recklessly wanting to get my own way’ on my part, but because I stand before Christien and I’ve promised her my loyalty and will remain loyal. Again, if my presence in The Hague bothers anyone, say so freely. In everything to do with a house or the like, I’m very willing to fit in. I need a studio, a house, living room, a bedroom, and whether it’s in The Hague or somewhere else isn’t a matter of indifference to me, but I’m entirely willing to fit in. However, the manner in which this is discussed must be quite different from that used by Pa, for example, on the occasion of Geel. That would be scandalous.
   If it’s possible for me to have, say, 150 francs a month this year (although my work can’t yet be sold straightaway, but forms a basis on which I can build later), I can start work with great eagerness and in good spirits, because then I at least know: I won’t lack the essentials to be able to work – daily bread, a house, drawing materials – I can work. If I know in advance that you’re definitely going to withdraw your help, then I’m powerless; with the best will in the world, my hand is paralyzed – yes, it will be wretched enough, and then it is truly terrible. What good would that be to you or anyone else? – I would despair and Christien and the child would perish. You may think I’m exaggerating if I believe you could do a thing like that, but ‘such things happen’. If this awful fate must strike me, then let it strike me.  Even though it looms over me, I can only say: I promised to be loyal to Christien and she promised to be loyal to me, and so it would never occur to us to break that promise.  Yet - heavens above – what’s going on – and what kind of age are we living in? – do wake up, Theo! – don’t let yourself be overwhelmed or influenced by Jesuitisms. Do I deserve to be left in the lurch because I helped a pregnant woman and don’t want to send her back onto the streets? We’ve promised to be loyal to each other; is that not allowed? Is death the punishment for that???  Adieu, old chap, but before you strike the blow and chop off my head and Christien’s and the child’s too... sleep on it again. But again – if you must – then in God’s name ‘off with my head’. But preferably not, I need it for drawing. (And Christien and the child couldn’t pose without heads.) Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, If I’m to give you a better understanding of what I’ve already written to you about, you’ll have to know where its origin lies. And I mustn’t tone down anything about my visit to Amsterdam. But I begin by asking you not to regard it as impertinent if I have to disagree with you. And first of all thank you sincerely for the 50 francs you enclosed. If I don’t put it forcefully it will be no use to you, but I would keep silent if you made it a precondition that I give in. I don’t believe that you’re making such a precondition, and you yourself will perhaps not find it unnatural that there are aspects of life that are less developed in you than your understanding of business, about which I freely grant that you’re far better informed than I, and shan’t lightly dare to say to you this or that isn’t so. On the contrary, especially when you explain a little to me, I often feel that your grasp of things is better than mine. But on the other hand, when it comes to love — I’m sometimes astonished by your views. And I even want — please forgive me — to add something new. Your last letter about M. and H.G.T. proved to me that you appear to have a firm foothold in the circle and class of M. and H.G.T. and a way of behaving that isn’t mine, so that you get on well with them whereas I do not. But outside that class your view is superficial and prejudiced. For your last letter gave me more food for thought than you may realize. My mistake lies here, it seems to me, and this is the true reason for my being fobbed off. If one has no money, one is by definition ineligible from the start, and so it was a mistake and short-sighted of me to take what M. said literally, and to think even for a moment: H.G.T. will remember that I’ve already been through so much trouble.
   These days, money is what might is right was in the past. Contradicting someone is fatal, and if you do it their reaction is not to reflect but to give you a punch in the throat. That’s to say, in the shape of ‘I shan’t buy anything by him any more’ or ‘I won’t help him again’.  This being the case, I risk my head if I argue with you but, Theo, I don’t know what else I can do — if it must go, here’s my neck. You know my circumstances and that my living or not living, as it were, depends on your help. But I’m caught in a dilemma. If I reply to your letter: Yes, Theo, you’re right, I’ll give up Christien, then in the first place I’ll be telling an untruth by saying you’re right, and in the second I’ll be committing myself to do something terrible. If I contradict you, and you do the same as H.G.T. and M., I get it in the neck, in a manner of speaking.  Well, in God’s name off with my head if you must. The alternative is even worse. So here begins a short text in which I’ll state some things frankly which I think you may take in such a way that you withdraw your help, but to be silent in order to keep your help seems to me a poor way to act, and I would rather risk the worst. If I can make clear to you what I believe you do not yet understand, things will go better for Christien and her child and myself. And to achieve that, I must venture to say what I shall say.
   To express what I felt for Kee Vos, I said plainly: she and no other. Her ‘no, nay, never’ wasn’t enough to make me give her up. I still had hope, and despite that — which I believed was a block of ice that would melt — my love remained strong.  Yet I had no rest. The tension became unbearable because she stayed silent all the time, because I never received so much as a syllable in reply.  Then I went to Amsterdam. There I was told... When you are in the house Kee will leave it. Your ‘she and no other’ is opposed by her ‘certainly not him’ — your persistence is sickening. I put my fingers in the flame of the lamp and said, let me see her for as long as I hold my hand in the flame, and it’s no wonder that later H.G.T. might have looked at my hand.  But they blew the lamp out, I believe, and said, you shall not see her. And then afterwards I had a talk with her brother, who said, officially or unofficially, that nothing but rijksdaalders3 would have any effect. Official or unofficial, I find both equally vile, and when I left Amsterdam I felt as if I had been on the slave market. You see, to me that was just crass, especially when they spoke of my coercion, and I felt that the things they told me were meant to beat me to death, and that my ‘she and no other’ was beaten to death. It wasn’t straightaway but still quickly enough that I felt that love die, to be replaced by a void, an infinite void. Now, as you know, I believe in God, I did not doubt the power of love. But then I felt something like, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And nothing made sense any more. I thought, have I deluded myself? O God, there is no God!5
   I couldn’t bear that horrible, cold reception in Amsterdam —people reveal their true colours when it comes to settling accounts. Would the Rev. J.P.S. and the Rev. T. v. G., looking so respectable in their robes and with their grey hair, dare to preach about love from the pulpit the way they talk about it behind closed doors? They would not. I thought of the words of the prophet: ‘Ancients of Israel, what do ye in the dark?’, words directed at deceitful priests who were influenced by bribes.  Enough. I was distracted and cheered up by Mauve. I threw myself into my work with all my strength. Then, after M. let me down and I was ill for a few days, at the end of January I met Christien. Theo, you say that if I had truly loved K.V. I wouldn’t have done that. But now do you understand better that I couldn’t go on after what had been said in Amsterdam? — should I have despaired then? — why should an honest man despair? — I’m no blackguard, I do not deserve to be treated so dreadfully. Well, what can they do? True, they had the whip hand, they thwarted me in Amsterdam. But now I no longer ask their advice and, being of age, I ask: am I at liberty to marry, yes or no? Am I at liberty to put on a working man’s clothes and to live as a working man, yes or no? To whom am I accountable? Who will try to coerce me?  If anyone wants to stop me, let him come forward! 
   You see, Theo, I am faint and weary. Think it over and you will understand. Pa, Uncle Stricker, H.G.T. and I don’t know who else call themselves well-mannered, civilized people and they behave with a coarseness, a Jesuitism, an injustice that my soul abhors. Never ever is there a hint or shadow of remorse or an honest turning back to say, I did this or that, it was wrong.  They have too much support, they know all too well that most people want to have things that way, and they keep in with everybody.  If they take pleasure in that, if they think that it will work out well for them and that they’ll also be at peace with it at the end — well, let them go ahead — I can’t stop them. But for myself I may and must act according to my own conscience. And is my way less right because someone says, ‘You are straying from the right way’? C.M. always talks about the right way too, just like H.G.T. and the clergymen. But C.M. also calls Degroux a common fellow, so what is C.M.? In future I’ll let him talk; my ears are tired. To put it out of my mind, I’m going to lie in the sand in front of the roots of an old tree and draw them. Wearing a linen smock and smoking my pipe and looking at the deep blue sky... or at the moss or the grass.
   That calms me down. And I feel equally calm when, for example, Christien or her mother poses and I work out the proportions and try to make the body with its long, undulating lines palpable under the folds of a black dress.  Then I’m a thousand miles away from C.M., J.P.S. and H.G.T., and much happier.  But... alas, then the cares come and I have either to speak or write about money and it starts all over again. Then I think: H.G.T. and C.M. would do so much better if they didn’t interfere with my ‘way’ and just encouraged me to draw. You will say: C.M. does that, but let me explain why the order hasn’t been completed yet. Mauve said to me: that uncle of yours only did that because he’d paid you a visit, but you should realize that it doesn’t mean anything and that immediately afterwards it will all be over, and then you won’t have anyone left.  You must understand, Theo, that I can’t bear that; if something like that is said to me, my hand goes limp as if paralyzed. Especially since C.M. has also made remarks about manners, I believe. For C.M. I’ve done 12 drawings for 30 guilders, that’s 2. apiece. It’s a tricky job involving more than 30 guilders’ worth of effort, and it isn’t fair to ask me to see it as a favour or something like that. I had already gone to a great deal of trouble for the other 6, I had done studies for them. That’s as far as I got. I’ve already put the effort in for the new ones, so it’s not laziness 
   — I am paralyzed.  Then I reason with myself: I shan’t take it to heart, but I’m nervous and a thing like that stays with me and comes back when I start work again. So that I have to change tack and work on other things. I don’t understand Mauve — it would have been kinder of him never to have bothered with me. What do you advise: should I carry on with the order for C.M. or not? I didn’t know what to do. Years ago there was a different tone among painters — now they devour each other and are fine gentlemen living in villas and intriguing. I prefer to be in Geest or another back street — drab, down at heel, muddy, sombre — but I’m never bored there, whereas I’m bored stiff in those mansions, and I think it’s a bad thing to be bored and so I say: I don’t belong there and I’m not going there any more. Thank God I have my work, but in order to work I still need money instead of earning it, and that’s the difficulty. If in a year’s time, or I don’t know how much longer or shorter, I can draw that Geest district or another street as I see it with the figures of old women, workers, girls, then H.G.T. &c. will be very pleasant, but then they’ll get my ‘go to hell’ and I’ll say, you left me in the lurch when I was in trouble, friend, I don’t know you, go away, you’re standing in my light. 
   Oh Lord, why should I be afraid? What do I care about H.G.T.’s ‘disagreeable’ and ‘unsaleable’? If occasionally I lose heart, I look at The diggers by Millet12 and The paupers’ pew by Degroux13 and then H.G.T. seems so small, so negligible, and all those remarks so pathetic that my good humour comes back and I light my pipe and get on with drawing. But if at such a moment, sooner or later, someone from civilization were to cross my path, he might just hear some things that were pretty sobering.  Now you will ask, Theo, whether this applies to you too. In reply I say: Theo, who has given me bread and helped me? You, I believe, so it certainly doesn’t apply to you. Only sometimes the thought occurs to me: why isn’t Theo a painter, won’t he eventually become bored in that civilization in the end? Won’t he later be sorry that he abandoned civilization to learn a craft, marry a woman, put on a smock? But there may be reasons that I can’t appreciate, so enough. As for love, I don’t know whether you already know what its ABC really is. Do you think me arrogant? By that I mean that you feel what love is best when you sit beside a sickbed, sometimes without a penny in your pocket. This isn’t picking strawberries in the spring14 — that only lasts a few days and most months are drab and more sombre, but in that sombreness one learns something new, and sometimes it seems to me that you know that, and sometimes I think, he doesn’t know it. 
   I want to go through the domestic joys and sorrows myself so that I can draw them from experience. After I had left Amsterdam I felt that my love, which was truly honest, truly unfeigned and strong, had been literally beaten to death — yet after death one rises from the dead. Resurgam. Then I found Christien. It was no time to hesitate or delay. Action was required. If I don’t marry her, it would have been kinder of me not to have taken any interest in her. Yet through this step a gulf opens; I then ‘marry beneath my station’, as they say, as decisively as I possibly can, but that is not forbidden and not bad, even if the world calls it wrong. My domestic arrangements will be like those in a worker’s household. I’m more at home with that, I wanted to do it before but couldn’t put it into practice then. I hope that you’ll still extend your hand to me across the gulf. I mentioned 150 francs a month. You say I need more. Wait a moment. My expenses have never been more than 100 francs a month on average since I left Goupil, except for occasional travelling. And at Goupil I first had thirty guilders and later 100 francs. 
 0  Now, these last months I’ve had more expenses, but I’ve had to settle in, and I ask you: are these expenses unreasonable or excessive? Especially since you know what else was involved. And how often in those long years I had much less than 100 francs. And if I sometimes had expenses because of travelling, have I not improved my knowledge of languages and developed my mind? Was that money down the drain? Now I need to make a straight path for my feet. If I postpone marriage, there will be something false in my position that will be repugnant to me. She and I are willing to scrimp and scrape as long as we marry. I am 30, she 32, so we’re not starting out as children. As for her mother and her child, the latter removes her stain; I have respect for a woman who is a mother and I don’t enquire into her past. I’m glad that she has a child; because of that she knows what she should know. Her mother is very hard-working and deserves a medal for the way she has raised a family of 8 children18 for years and kept their heads above water. She wouldn’t want there to be any dependence, she earns her living by going out to work. I’m writing to you late at night. Christien is unwell and the time of her departure for Leiden is at hand. You must forgive me if my writing is sloppy, for I’m tired.
 1  And yet, after your letter I wanted to write to you. In Amsterdam I was so flatly refused, so fobbed off that it would have been lunacy to persist. But should I have despaired at that point? Jumped into the water or something like that? God forbid. I would have done that if I had been a bad person. I renewed myself, not on purpose but because I found an opportunity for renewal and didn’t refuse to begin again. This time, though, things are different and Christien and I understand each other better. We needn’t take account of anyone, but of course are far from pretending to keep up a position.  Knowing the prejudices of the world, I’m aware that what I must do is withdraw from my social circle, which cast me out long ago anyway. But then there’s nothing more to be said and one may go no further. My personal liberty may not be infringed. I told my Father that plainly enough at the time of the Geel affair, when he wanted to pack me off to a madhouse. She and I are of age, so if Pa is opposed he’ll have to register his refusal formally according to the law and the judge will have to decide. However, I hope that this won’t be necessary and that we can reach a resolution by rather more peaceful means. It may be that I wait a while before we start living together if our 
 2  circumstances are particularly difficult, but even then I want to get married — without telling anyone, completely quietly. If anybody makes a fuss, I won’t take any notice. Since she’s a Catholic, the wedding will be all the simpler, for the church is naturally out of the question; neither she nor I want to have anything to do with it. You will say, that’s short and to the point. So be it. I want to be concerned with one thing only, drawing, and she too has one regular occupation, posing. I sincerely wish that it were possible for me to take the house next door. It’s exactly big enough, because the attic can be turned into a bedroom and the studio is a good size and light, much better than here. But would it be possible? But even if I had to live in a hovel, I would rather have a crust of bread beside my own hearth, however poor, than live without marrying her.  She knows what poverty is, so do I. Tersteeg doesn’t know a damned thing about it, and neither do you, Theo. Poverty has its advantages and disadvantages. Despite poverty, we’ll take the chance. The fishermen know that the sea is dangerous and the storm fearsome, but could never see that the dangers were a reason to continue strolling on the beach. They leave that wisdom to those to whom it appeals. When the storm comes — when night falls — what’s worse: the danger or the fear of danger? Give me reality, the danger itself. Adieu Theo, it’s late. Pardon me for this letter, I’m tired but wanted to write anyway. I wish you could understand and that I could put it in a clearer and friendlier way, but don’t take offence, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
 3  I believe (or rather there’s a glimmer of beginning to believe) that there’s a possibility that the notion ‘Theo will withdraw his help if I argue with him’ &c. &c. may be utterly needless. But, Theo, I’ve seen things like that done so often that I wouldn’t respect you less and not be angry with you if you did likewise. Because I would think, he knows no better; they all behave like that, unthinkingly but not from malice. If I continue to receive your help, that will be something utterly new, a rare chance I haven’t counted on. Because for a considerable time I’ve gone around, so to speak, always with the prospect of the very worst before me, as has Christien, because I continually said to her ‘Lass, I fear a time will come when I’m completely penniless’. But I haven’t said that to you before it was necessary. If you continue your help 
 4  it is a solution, a deliverance, so unexpected, so undreamt-of, that I would be utterly overwhelmed by joy. And now, I daren’t think about it and resolutely push the thought away, even while I write to you about it with a steady hand, so as not to weaken. What I experienced this winter with Mauve has been a lesson to me, making me prepare myself since then for the worst... a death sentence from you, that is, the ending of your help. You’ll say, but that help hasn’t stopped... but I received it with a certain reserve, thinking he doesn’t yet know everything he will know one day, and until the crisis comes I’ll have no rest and remain on guard, prepared for the worst. Now the crisis is here and I still can’t decide, I don’t dare hope yet. I’ve told Christien: I’ll support you until Leiden. When you come back from Leiden, I don’t know how you’ll find me — with or without a penny — but 
 5  what I have is as much yours and the child’s as mine. Christien doesn’t know the details — and doesn’t ask, knowing that I deal honestly with her and wanting to be with me come what may. The postscript in your last letter made me think... I thought, how does he mean that?... But up to now I’ve always thought of you as likely to turn away from me as soon as you knew everything. So I lived by the day but with a sombre fear of the worst from which I dare not yet account myself freed. I also worked by the day, not daring to order more drawing or painting materials than I could pay for by the day, not daring to undertake anything in the way of painting, for example, not daring to tackle it as I would have done had I counted on relations with Mauve and H.G.T. being restored. Thinking that if their friendliness was superficial, their unfriendliness went deeper, and anyway, I took seriously what Mauve said, ‘it’s all over’, not when he said it to me (for then I took it coolly enough in a spirit of bravado like the Indians who say ‘it doesn’t hurt at all’ when they’re tortured), but since he wrote to me ‘I don’t want to have anything to do with you for two months’. Since I broke the plaster casts. In short, I’ve always argued to myself: I can expect nothing more from Mauve and Tersteeg, and I’ll thank God if Theo carries on sending me the needful long enough for me to support Christien safely until Leiden, and then I’ll 
 6  explain to him and say, stop, this is what I’ve done.  Do you understand any of this?...  So I’m writing to you now as I spoke to Mauve when he said, ‘it’s all over’ — almost as a challenge — prepared for the worst — cold-bloodedly — sarcastically — and yet deadly serious, not sparing you, criticizing you for your conventions, yet not frivolously but... IN DAMNED EARNEST.  Do you understand now? Having just gone through the dreadful suspense with Christien, but she having pulled through, I am now pleading, declaring, Gentlemen, here is my neck. I plead guilty in that I hid from all of you something that has cost money, but there was a human life to be saved and I wanted to save it come what may, not talk about it. But now... if you condemn me I’ll be guilty and shan’t protest. I supply work for your money, but if it isn’t enough then I’m in your debt and can’t repay you. I’m prepared for your displeasure but not for your mercy... I’ve never counted on that and I don’t know how I stand what is it to be??? I’ve prepared myself for the worst and not hoped for anything less bad. What’s the position? But speak clearly.  In short, I knew very well that I was compromising myself in the eyes of the world by helping Christien, and I did not, or rather still do not, count on your wanting to have anything to do with me after knowing that I compromised myself. But I couldn’t leave her to her fate. I wanted to save her, even though my head might be at stake. And now I still don’t know whether it’s to be ‘POLLICE VERSO’, yes or no??? If it’s yes: ‘Morituri te salutant’. I’ve seen the thumbs move, but don’t know whether they’re pointing up or down.  My dear Theo, Christien had a lot of cramp &c., and so it seemed to me best for her to go to Leiden again to find out exactly what was wrong.  She went there and came back again. Everything is all right, thank God — but, as you know, she had an operation in March1 and has now been examined again. She needs care and must continue taking tonics — and if possible a few more baths as well, but there’s no problem and she has every chance of coming through it safely.  In March the professor couldn’t say exactly when she’d give birth, but thought it would be the end of May or beginning of June. Now he says it will probably be well into June, and he has altered her admission note for the hospital to mid-June. This time he asked her at length about who she was with, and because of what he said about that I’m now quite certain of what I thought before: that she’d collapse if she had to go back onto the streets, and that it was high 
   time help came last winter when I met her. So I couldn’t consider leaving her, as I wrote to you earlier, for in the circumstances that would be a vile trick on my part.  The doctor thought she was better than in March. The child is healthy and he has given her instructions about feeding &c., so I won’t be completely in the dark. The linen for the child is ready too — the essentials.  I am faced here not by an illusion or abstraction but by reality, which requires firm action. In the circumstances I can see no better course than to marry her, neither for her nor for myself. As I wrote to you, I hadn’t expected the gentle tone of your letter of 13 May and the preceding one. I had cherished no 
   illusions, and thought that you would have completely condemned my actions and withdrawn your help. And still I hardly dare hope that your help will continue, because I know that in the eyes of most people of your class such an action is regarded, I believe, as a capital offence leading to some form of banishment.  So I’m really looking forward to your next letter, and to knowing if you’ve received the drawings. But I’m not yet deluding myself about this. It’s just that I wouldn’t be honest if I said anything to you other than: it’s my firm intention to marry her as soon as possible. The reasons you give aren’t weighty enough to make me change my mind, although in one or two of your remarks there is much that, particularly on its own, is wholly or partly true.  Now, to tell you the truth, a little more is actually needed this month, although I 
   have paid for bread up to 1 June and have got in things like coffee &c. If you tell me there’s no difficulty, as I thought there was, I really hope, of course, to get to work on C.M.’s order, and have done the studies for it. I’ll need another 3 weeks, though, to finish the 6 drawings, for to have 6 good ones I’ll have to do more than 6, on top of what I’ve already done. I don’t know what I’ll get for it, but I’ll do my best and so I hope to receive it in June.  If there’s anything good — after all — in my behaviour towards Christien, I believe it’s more to your credit than to mine, since I have been and am merely the instrument for doing it, but would have been powerless without your help. The money you’ve sent has helped me to get on with drawing and, more importantly, saved the life of Christien and the child up to now. In a sense, though, I’m guilty if you should consider it an abuse of trust, but I hope you won’t consider it so.  Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just a brief word in haste. Have you received the drawings and my later letter yet? I mean the portfolio with the large Sorrow in it and the tree roots1 &c. I hear that Uncle Cent is in Paris — I hope you haven’t discussed the matter in question with him, because you know what terrible gossips they are in Princenhage — having little else to do. Of course they regard this as a ‘demoralization’, or something even worse. Fine. As long as I don’t have to listen to them and am not present, they can gossip for all I care.  Yesterday I had a friendly letter from Pa and Ma that would give me great pleasure if I could believe this mood would last. However, when I talk to them about the question of Christien (which I’ll definitely do in 3 weeks or so — when she’s in Leiden and I can get away — but not before), when, I say, they know about one thing and another, will they still speak kindly then??? It isn’t up to them, though, and you know well enough what I think about the matter; and since I’m not doing anything not permitted by law, and since I doubt their competence to make moral judgements, their refusal would hurt but wouldn’t make me stop or stand still. 
   I’m working again on the drawings for C.M. But will he like them? Perhaps not. I can’t see such drawings as anything other than studies of perspective — and so I’m doing them mainly to practise.  Even if His Hon. doesn’t take them I won’t regret the effort I’m putting into them, because I’d like to keep them myself and get some practice in the matter on which such an enormous amount depends — perspective and proportion. I’ve been rather weak for the last fortnight and haven’t felt well. I didn’t want to give in to it and carried on regardless. But I couldn’t sleep for several nights on end, and was feverish and nervy. Yet I force myself to keep going and to stay busy, for this is no time to fall ill. I must carry on — Christien and her mother have moved to a smaller house, because when Christien returns from Leiden she’ll move in with me, wherever I am, whether in better or worse circumstances. It’s a small house with a courtyard which I hope to do a drawing of this week. With every day that passes I see more and more that the step I’m taking opens up an interesting field for me to draw and find models. People should take this into account if they want to judge me. It’s because of my occupation that I dare do this; I couldn’t do it if I had a different kind of work. 
   I long for your letter and hope you’ll soon find time to write. It seems to me that you can do a great deal of good in this affair in that, knowing how matters stand (and if you need further information about that, I’ll be happy to provide it as honestly as I can), in that, as I say, knowing what the position is, you’ll be able to moderate and modify somewhat the judgement of those who will later hear about the matter but still not understand exactly what it’s all about, so that it doesn’t lead to unpleasantness.  For you will understand this — I want to avoid any unpleasantness, gossip or dispute as far as possible — and it was for the sake of peace that I said nothing to anyone except you, and shan’t say more than absolutely necessary, for instance to Pa, until she’s in Leiden.  This isn’t something that I’ve sought myself; I encountered it on my way and have taken it on, and am glad that what’s required here is to act without hesitation — not to meditate on the matter. And have first shown you the darkest side of the question, in the hope that it won’t look so bad later on. 
   But — I did wish I knew what to do about the studio I wrote to you about. I would also be content with a poorer house, but I don’t know of a more suitable and practical one. And fear that a less practical one wouldn’t really be cheaper, because then my work would suffer, even if I saved a few guilders a month by paying less rent.  And later would probably say, why did I let that studio go and not take more trouble to get it?  More than for a letter, I long for your visit, but I understand that it may have to wait for some time. I’m not really in the mood for writing, but sometimes I have to. If you could send me a little more, it would be good, for things aren’t easy for me. Well, in any case write soon. I would especially like to know what you think about the studio — it could be gone any day. Adieu. Again, don’t inconvenience yourself, but if you can, send me a little more. Ever yours, Vincent And also write to say whether you’ve received the drawings. My dear Theo, Today, Saturday, I had a visit from Rappard, and I’m glad that now he has been here. He also asked after you with great interest.  He saw the drawings I’m doing for C.M. among other things, and they seem to please him, especially a large one of the courtyard or back yard at the house where Sien’s mother lives. I would like you to see that one, as well as another of a carpenter’s shed and yard with small figures at work. The perspective is rather more complicated than in the Laan van Meerdervoort I sent you, and I’ve laboured long and hard on it. I must tell you that these days I’m already out of doors by 4 o’clock in the morning, because during the day it’s too difficult to be on the street on account of the passers-by and the urchins, and because that’s the best time to see the broad outlines while things still have tone. But, old chap, this has been an anxious fortnight for me. When I wrote to you around the middle of May, all I had left was 3 or 3. guilders after paying the baker. I had practically nothing else to eat but dry black bread with a little coffee, and Sien too. Because we’d bought linen for her baby and she’d been to Leiden &c. 
   The rent is due on 1 June, and I have nothing, literally nothing. I hope you’ll send something.  A week ago I was terribly weak due to constant sleeplessness. But now I’m making good progress with several drawings, so that the order for C.M. is well advanced, and as a result I’m in better spirits, I’m somewhat calmer again. Still, old chap, write to me soon and save me from the landlord, because, as you know, their kind brook no delay.  Rappard’s visit cheered me up; he seems to be working hard. He gave me 2. guilders because he saw a tear in a drawing and said, you should have that repaired. I know, I said, but I haven’t got the money and the drawing must be sent off. Then he said straightaway that he’d be glad to give it to me, and I could have had more but I didn’t want to, and I gave him a pile of woodcuts and a drawing6 in return. It was one of those meant for C.M., and so I was very glad to be able to get it repaired, because it was the best of them all. 
   That same drawing may be sold later for 50 guilders or so, and now — I hadn’t got the money to have a tear in it repaired.  Anyway. I do hope, brother, that you don’t think badly of Sien and me. That lass has put up with my disagreeable side, and in many respects she understands me better than others.  She’s so willing to help in everything that I can’t tell you how useful she is to me. If I get angry while she’s posing or about something else, she knows how to take it, and has seen that it doesn’t go deep with me. Equally, if I fret or grumble about something that isn’t going well, she often manages to calm me down, which I couldn’t do myself.  And she’s thrifty and accepts our piece of black bread if need be, without becoming despondent. And so do I, as long as we get by. I hope that you’ve received the drawings I sent around 10 May, I think, two dozen in a portfolio. I’ve heard nothing about it yet. 
   I do wish there were a few more people I could do work for on the same sort of conditions as for C.M. And above all that C.M. perseveres, for these drawings are much better than the first, and gradually I’ll produce even better ones.  And at that price, he can’t go wrong.  You know all about it: I’ll be in good spirits as long as you don’t desert me because of Sien. I’m at work on the dot of 4, so with a little sympathy from those who know me I’ll get on top of things.  I’m hoping for your letter. Accept a handshake in thought, but above all write soon and save me from the landlord. Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent My dear brother, Today or tomorrow, being the 1st of June, I promised to pay my landlord 5 guilders rent of studio for the month of April + 7. guilders for last month — makes 12. guilders. But not having up to now received any letter of yours since that of May 12th1 I have nothing to pay him his twelve guilders and 50 c with. The man will surely not give me any longer delay but they can immediately sell my furniture publicly. Whatever may be your opinion concerning the things I told you — do not let it come to this scandal. My drawings for C.M. are ready but I shan’t be able to get that money early enough. I say again — let us at all events avoid irregularity and public scandal and talk or write calmly on the subject till we know what ought to be done. So I hope you’ll send me what I so greatly want, and write. I work day and night and have a small drawing ready for you which I’ll send bye and bye. b I have no more money for a stamp, excuse the postcard, and believe me Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter with the enclosure and immediately paid the landlord. There’s a mortgage on the house and so the rent is collected by someone else, who evicted the people downstairs last month; he gives short shrift. What you say about dividing the month into 3 so that I would receive the money on the 1st, 10th and 20th is most welcome. That’s much easier for me. I don’t need to tell you what a relief your letter was.  Have you received the Fish-drying barn drawing? I’m working on a couple more to add to it, so that you’ll have 3 or so done in the same manner. C.M. also has some in this manner, but haven’t heard from him yet. I want to say something more about what you seem to fear, namely the possible steps the family may take to make me a ward of court. If you think that ‘a few witnesses (false ones at that) need only state that you can’t manage your financial affairs, and that’s enough to give Pa the right to deprive you of your civil rights and make you a ward of court’, if, I say, you really think that it’s that easy these days, then I take the liberty to question that.  Those wardships which were often so scandalously abused to get rid of people thought to be ‘troublesome’ or ‘disagreeable’ (awkward customers)4 aren’t granted so readily these days. And the law gives the accused the opportunity to appeal, as well as numerous remedies. But, you will say, a clever lawyer will twist the law &c. &c. So be it, but I say to you, in this day and age people aren’t made wards of court so easily or so readily... I know of a case where even the Jesuits were unable to have someone they wanted out of the way made a ward of court, for the simple reason that the man said, I am not in the slightest the sort of person to whom wardship is at all applicable, and wouldn’t give in. 
   Then, an example of someone who was placed under supervision somewhere against his will so that he couldn’t go where he pleased, warns the person supervising him that he has no right to deprive him of his freedom and must let him go... warns him several times quite coolly and calmly but receives a refusal in reply. Then smashes his guard’s brains in with the poker and remains calmly standing beside him and gives himself up. The case was investigated and the result was complete acquittal (because in some extreme cases there’s a ‘right of self-defence’), and because of the murder the original case was looked at again and it was found that the accused wasn’t someone who deserved to be made a ward of court. In short, in this day and age it isn’t easy to make someone a ward of court if he protests calmly and manfully and forthrightly. I don’t really think the family would do such a thing... but, you will say... at the time of Geel5 they already wanted to. Sadly, yes — Pa is capable of it — but I tell you, if he dares to attempt something like that, I will stand up to him to the utmost. He’d do well to think twice before attacking me, but again I doubt whether they’d dare do such a thing. If they do want and dare to, I shan’t say, ‘Oh, please don’t do that’, but on the contrary, I’ll let them go ahead so that they’re shamed in public and have to bear the costs of the matter. I say to you, I know of a case in which a noble, very rich family wanted to make someone a ward of court, employing lawyers and Jesuits, but still didn’t succeed in having that person made a ward of court — even though he was accused on two counts: first, incompetence in financial matters and second, diminished mental capacity. He protested, and the judge let the family know unofficially that they’d be well advised to drop the case; the family had to give up even before proceedings really began. I would only add this: that, it being known to you that I protest at all times against anything of the sort, if sooner or later they take advantage of, for example, a possible sickness or indisposition on my part to take action against me, you will know that it is not with my consent. 
   In the event of illness I hope that you would resist any attempt to exploit my helplessness. In a healthy state I can deal with it on my own, and have no fear of anything of this kind. And I can’t believe that they’d really resort to such a measure, but if at some time you learn that steps are being taken, let me know.  Of course I don’t mean when people are just talking about it or mention it — I can put up with mere talk, but not if it turns into deeds. If they do something, I hope you’ll warn me. I’m familiar with the law on wardship, I do not believe they can do anything to me.  Once before in my life, many years ago though, I had a letter along the same lines as your last one. It was from H.G.T., whom I had consulted about something that I’ve regretted speaking to him about ever since. Then, I recall, a kind of fear swept over me and I was afraid of my family. Now — 10 or 12 years later — I’ve learned to think differently about my obligations and relationship to my family. Pa is always harping on the ‘respect and obedience’ I’m supposed to owe him. I don’t mean to say that a child shouldn’t owe its parents respect and obedience, but I want to point out that Pa sometimes abuses that badly and, for example, if someone doesn’t agree with him, immediately takes it as a lack of respect. It would be a fine thing if I were to organize my life as Pa would like it. It’s absolutely certain that then nothing more would come of my drawing, for I would be unable to do anything any more. I’ll share and agree with Pa’s view when Pa acquires an understanding of art, and that will never happen. The ministers often bring ‘beauty’ into a sermon, but then it’s in their usual way and very heavy going. Now, I’m glad you’ve told me frankly what you think about Sien, namely that she intrigued and that I allowed myself to be fooled by her. And I can understand that you might think that, because such cases aren’t unknown. However, I remember once shutting the door so firmly in the face of a girl who wanted to try something similar that I rather doubt that I’m likely to be the victim of a crude intrigue. 
   The position with Sien is that I am truly attached to her and she to me, that she’s my loyal helper who goes everywhere with me, and who becomes ever more indispensable to me each day. My feelings for her are less passionate than my feelings last year for Kee Vos, but a love like mine for Sien is the only kind I’m capable of, especially after being disappointed in that first passion. She and I are two unfortunates who keep each other company and bear the burden together, and it’s in that way that unhappiness is turned into happiness and the unbearable is made bearable. Her mother is just like an old woman as Frère paints them. Now, you understand that I wouldn’t care a great deal about the formality of marriage if the family didn’t, as long as I remain loyal to her. But I know for certain that Pa really does think it important, and although he won’t approve of my marrying her he would think it far worse if I lived with her without being married. His advice would be: leave her, and he would give that advice in this form: wait, which would be the end of it and quite inappropriate. Pa’s like that... he procrastinates over matters that are urgent and pressing, and by doing so can make a person furious. So let Pa keep his ‘wait’ to himself, for if he should say it I couldn’t restrain myself. I’m 30 years old with furrows on my forehead and lines on my face as if I were 40, and my hands are full of grooves — yet I’m regarded by Pa, in his eyes, as a boy (it’s 18 months since Pa wrote to me ‘you are in the first flush of youth’). And that’s then said with a tuppence-worth of wisdom thrown in that I’ve heard many times before. Do you know what I compare Pa and Uncle Stricker with?... ‘The two augurs’ by Gérôme. But I’m an “awkward customer” — so be it. Now you will say: Vincent, immerse yourself instead in perspective and the Fish-drying barns. And then I say, you’re quite right, brother, and that’s why I’m going to work on the two drawings that belong with the first, and that you’ll presently receive as proof that I like nothing so much as immersing myself in the things of nature and drawing, without going into such, to me, eminently foolish matters as being made a ward of court. Adieu, with my warm thanks for your loyal help. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   I held on to this letter because I wanted to send the small drawings with it, but they still need some work. But one is finished, namely another fish-drying barn. Sien and I camped in the dunes for it for days on end from morning till evening like true bohemians. We took bread and a small bag of coffee, and fetched hot water from a water and coals woman10 in Scheveningen. This water and coals woman in her setting is wonderful — indescribably interesting. I’ve already been to that shop at 5 in the morning when the street-sweepers came to drink their coffee. That would be a thing to draw, old chap!!! However, the posing of the various figures would cost me quite a lot, but at heart I long to do it. Do write to me when you can to let me know what you think of these three latest drawings. And also whether you really think I should be more afraid than I am of being made a ward of court, which I believe impossible. For I should not be unconcerned if steps were really being taken; that goes without saying. It would be inconvenient for me to go to Etten just now, first because I’m so wrapped up in my work, and second because the journey would cost me more than I can afford, and I can better spend it on Sien. I’m delighted by the prospect of your coming. I’m eager to know what sort of impression Sien will make on you. There’s nothing special about her; she’s just an ordinary woman of the people who for me has something sublime. Anyone who loves an ordinary, everyday person and is loved by her is happy — despite the dark side of life. If it hadn’t been that she needed help last winter, the bond between her and me wouldn’t have come about in the circumstances, after my disappointment and wounded love. In fact, though, it was precisely the feeling of being able to be useful after all, even despite that disappointment, that brought me to my senses and made me arise. It isn’t that I sought it, but I found it, and now the fact is that there’s a warm attachment between her and me, and it would do me no credit to give that up. 
   I might perhaps have become indifferent and sceptical if I hadn’t met Sien, but my work and she now keep me active. And I would like to add that, because Sien takes on all the toil and worry of the painter’s life and is so willing to pose, I believe I’ll be a better artist with her than if I had won Kee Vos. For Sien may not be so graceful and has perhaps, or rather certainly, very different manners, but I’ve been struck by her good will and devotion.  Heyerdahl has now seen Sorrow, but I would like the latest three drawings to be seen by a draughtsman, for example Henri Pille. H. Pille certainly won’t remember me, although we have met, and I know that he’s someone who’s sometimes very odd in his behaviour, and I don’t know whether he’ll say anything. But I just wanted to know whether the drawings would make any impression on him and whether they appealed to him. I say this just in case you run into Henri Pille now and again, for you’d have to show them to him as if by chance. I must also tell you that all goes well with my collection of woodcuts, which I think of as belonging to you although I have the use of them. I now have at least a thousand prints, English (mainly SWAIN’S), American, French. And Rappard, for example, who now also collects them, liked them very much. So that’s something that belongs to you which you haven’t yet seen. But I’m sorry that I was unable to buy Doré’s London recently. The Jew 15 wanted 7. guilders for it, but I couldn’t pay that. And an Album Boetzel. Anyway, you’ll see them when you come here, and I hope be pleased with them. Perhaps through them you’ll make the acquaintance of some artists you’ve seen little or nothing of before.  Vincent 
 My dear Theo, What I really must say to you is this. You know full well that right up to today there has never been anything of a criminal nature in my life and that I’m in full possession of my civil rights as a Dutchman. That I’ll be on my guard against such things as are not permitted under the law of the land, but then would certainly not allow myself to be molested or made a ward of court or anything like that. I’m aware that sometimes very ugly things were repeatedly said about me in the family in various ways, although I don’t know the exact source. But I doubt whether those who said those things would dare to maintain them if it really came down to swearing to them in court or something like that.  I don’t know whether you have the Constitution of the Netherlands and the other laws. I’ve frequently consulted them about various questions for myself, if I doubted the legality of something or other. And not only the Dutch laws, but I’ve sometimes taken the trouble to compare the Dutch regulations with the French or English constitution. Not only now but in previous years when I was studying some points of history, I had to look up the laws.  So I declare to you that I’ll calmly await the course of events, but I just hope the question won’t arise and that, on the contrary, the family will be disposed 
   to settle things in an orderly and peaceful way when the need arises. I must tell you, Theo, that I’ve noticed that Pa, for example, sometimes does not take the trouble to check things, or bases and establishes a judgement on such shaky foundations and superficial impressions, information or hearsay that it can’t hold water. Moreover, an article of the law shouldn’t be viewed in isolation or taken out of context, but should be seen in the context in which it occurs, with the amendments and explanatory articles that go with it.  If, for example, it says, ‘A child owes its parents respect’, as the law on paternal authority begins, it isn’t good enough to fly into a temper and say, ‘You don’t have enough respect for your parents’. You must first think and see if there’s indeed anything unlawful in the child’s behaviour before resorting to the law.  But what often happens in our family? There’s some piece of gossip; people inflate it, take it to an extreme, arrive at a judgement or decision about someone, sometimes entirely without having informed the person in question or speaking to him, relying solely on impressions, hearsay, snippets of information (the devil take them, especially the last). Our dear Uncle Cent has a way of gathering ‘snippets of information’ that I find far from loyal.  For my part, when I saw that kind of thing at home, I said often enough to Pa, This will bring you no good. Just imagine, Theo, how very different it could have been in our home. If Pa had been a little less suspicious of me, for example, if he was a little less mistrustful, if, instead of always seeing me as doing everything wrong, he had devoted a little 
   more patience and good will to understanding my true intentions — which he always completely misinterprets. In the first place he would have felt less sorrow on my account and more peace of mind about me, and in the second would have spared me a good deal of sorrow. For it’s a great sorrow to think that it’s even worse: as if I had no home, no father, no mother, no family, and I’ve often thought that – do so now as well. But one thing is certain: one may not proceed behind someone’s back, not even, I believe, make decisions about someone, even in a family council, unless the accused, or rather the person about whom the council is deliberating, is present. But what is a family council? In many cases no more than an intrigue, sometimes a sop to the family’s vanity — much ado about nothing.  But often something is decided which proves that those present have overlooked the law and which will thus not be upheld when it actually comes to court. If I really were a bad or spiteful, trouble-making person or an intriguer or dimwit, then I really would be afraid.  Now, being as I am, I really don’t believe that I have anything to fear from any steps the family or members of the family may take against me. It is my sincere wish that no steps be taken against me, not because I fear anything but because I would rather have peace than disputes.  I do wish that you knew Sien, but you’re so far away and it’s impossible for me to describe a person so that you’d know her well enough from the description alone. However, I can try. Do you remember the nursemaid we had years ago in Zundert, Leen Veerman? Sien is a similar type of person, I believe, if my memory is correct. 
 0  Now, her profile is rather like the Angel of the passion by Landelle, you know that I mean a kneeling figure — the print is published by Goupil. But of course she isn’t exactly the same, I mention it just to give you a rough idea of the line of her face. She had a mild case of smallpox and is thus no longer beautiful, but the lines of her figure are simple and not without grace. What I appreciate in her is that she doesn’t play the coquette with me, goes her own way quietly, is thrifty, is very willing to adapt to circumstances as she finds them and to learn, so that she can help me in my work in a thousand ways. And the fact that she’s no longer beautiful, no longer young, no longer silly, no longer coquettish — those are the very things that make it possible for me to do something with her. Her constitution has suffered severely, and last winter she was very weak. Now, thanks to plain food, plenty of walking and fresh air and taking baths, she’s much stronger and more robust than then. But a pregnancy is a hard undertaking. Her speech is ugly, and she often says things and uses expressions that our little sister Willemien, for example, who was brought up very differently, wouldn’t say, but this no longer bothers me in the slightest. I would rather she had ugly speech and was good than cultured in her speech and without a heart. But that’s just it — she has lots of heart — can endure, has patience, good will, takes trouble, and rolls her sleeves up. Comes every week to scrub the studio to save the money for a cleaner. Well, we’ll be poor from time to time, but as long as she has something to eat, she too doesn’t have a weak constitution in the sense of having an illness. But she has repeatedly suffered a lot, from smallpox for example, and then from throat disease. But that’s no reason why she shouldn’t grow old, and in complete good health. What’s more, what reason do I have for melancholy? I have my work after all, and my enjoyment of it. Since when is there any need to waver or hesitate or be faint-hearted? That’s why people fail, but not through tackling the difficulties and problems, even if they seem to be of huge dimensions. 
 1  I must ask you something again in confidence. Do you think Pa might perhaps be concerned that I was going to ask him for money because I’m in this situation? Let me just explain how things stand. I most certainly wouldn’t do that. Pa has often told me that my upbringing &c. cost more than that of the others. This is why I’ll now not ask Pa for anything more, for example in the event of marriage, not so much as a single old cup or saucer. Sien and I have the essentials. The only thing we can’t do without as long as I can’t sell is the 150 francs from you for the rent, bread, shoes and drawing materials — in short, the running expenses. But make no mistake, I don’t want to interfere in Pa’s financial affairs either now or later (he has always kept them completely hidden from me, except that he told me long ago and on very many occasions that there had been a capital but that this had been drawn on and was now reduced to almost nothing). You know what I’m like. I’m not the sort of money-grubber or miser who would ask Pa for something now, knowing how things stand, although I know no more details beyond the general point that the capital has been reduced to nothing or soon will be.  I sometimes feel as deep a compassion for Pa and Ma as you, but you know that I can’t do what you do and so I never mention it. However, you know what I think about it, and if you happen to discuss the matter you could tell Pa this. I ask for nothing, not so much as an old cup or saucer, only one single thing — that I be allowed to cherish and care for my poor, weak, tormented little wife as well as my poverty permits, without steps being taken to separate or hinder us or cause us sorrow. No one cared for her or wanted her, she was alone and abandoned like a discarded rag and I picked her up and gave her all the love, all the tenderness, all the care, that was in me. She felt that and has grown stronger, or rather is in the process of growing stronger.  You know the old fable or parable. There was a poor man in a city who had absolutely nothing except for one little ewe lamb20 that he had bought and fed so that it grew up in his house — it ate from his meat and drank from his cup and slept in his bosom and was like a daughter to him. There was also a rich man in the city, who had many flocks of sheep and herds of cattle. Even so, he took that ewe lamb from the poor man and slaughtered it. 
 2  See, if Tersteeg, for example, could do what he wanted, he would take Sien from me and throw her back into that accursed old life that she always loathed.  And for what? — to please Princenhage21 or to give himself an air of virtue as if he’d caught me committing a crime! They have no feeling at all in Princenhage; they’re bored, so an intrigue — someone to persecute, or something like that — is a welcome diversion. And yet, how do I obstruct Tersteeg? I ask nothing from him, I don’t bother him in any way — for as you know I haven’t even set foot in his gallery for six months. Shall not do so in the future either, because now more than ever I find him hateful for his lack of normal human feeling, because he has no respect for life but just hacks at it savagely. A person without money should be done away with according to him... away with them — all rags and tatters.  Let me be quite clear, the lives of the woman, the children and me hang by the thread of the 150 francs a month until my work starts to go. If that thread breaks before then, it’s ‘morituri te salutant’. It has been worked out exactly, exactly, and we can only make ends meet by exercising the greatest possible thrift. But to us that’s a blessing, because we’re bound firmly to each other by love.  Whether Pa and Ma remain calm will depend for 3/4 on what you say to them. If you voice an objection, the fat will be in the fire. If you say something like, stay calm, don’t interfere, or if you manage one way or another to calm them, they’ll stay calm. You need not compromise yourself for this or take the responsibility yourself. Far from it — that rests with me. But, if you remain what you’ve been to me up to now, you could reassure them in two respects as regards finances: first that I have a resource for meeting running expenses in your monthly sum; second that I ask nothing from them, not a penny, not so much as an old cup or plate; third that I already have the most essential furniture, bedding, children’s clothes, cradle &c.  There you have it, brother. May the ‘dramatic’ be avoided and may serenity prevail for all of us. This is my hope and this is what I strive for.  My dear Theo, Today, Saturday, I’m sending you the two drawings Fish-drying barn in the dunes, Scheveningen1 Carpenter’s yard and laundry (from the window of my studio). I’ve thought of you so often these past few days, and also occasionally about the time long ago when, as you will remember, you visited me in The Hague and we walked along Trekweg3 to Rijswijk and drank milk at the mill there. It may be that this influenced me somewhat when I did these drawings, in which I have tried as naїvely as possible to draw things exactly as I saw them. At the time of the mill, however dear those days still are to me, it would have been impossible for me to put what I saw and felt on paper. So what I’m saying is that the changes brought about by time have not fundamentally altered my feelings; it’s just that I believe they have taken a different form. My life, and yours too perhaps, after all, is no longer as sunny as it was then, but I still wouldn’t want to go back, because it’s precisely through some trouble and adversity that I see something good emerging, namely the expression of those feelings.  Rappard was pleased with a similar drawing which C.M. has, and moreover with all the others C.M. has. Especially with the largest of the almshouse. And he is someone who understands what I want and appreciates how difficult it is. I believe you would find Rappard much changed since his first time in Paris when you knew him.  I have in front of me a volume of the Household edition of Dickens, with illustrations. They are excellent and are drawn by Barnard and Fildes. They show parts of Old London, which take on a very different appearance from the carpenter’s yard, for example, also because of the peculiarities of the wood engraving. Yet I still believe that the way to get that boldness and daring later is to quietly carry on observing as faithfully as possible now. As you see, there are several planes in this drawing, and one can look around in it and peer into all sorts of nooks and crannies. It lacks that ruggedness as yet, at least doesn’t by any means have that quality to the same extent as the above illustrations, but that will come with practice. 
   I have heard from C.M. in the form of a postal order for 20 guilders but without a single word to go with it. So for the time being I haven’t the slightest idea whether he wants to order something new from me or whether the drawings are to his taste. But comparing it with the price paid for the previous ones, 30 guilders, and bearing in mind that this last batch (the first contained 12 small ones; this had 1 small one, 4 like the enclosed and 2 large ones – i.e. 7 items in all) was more substantial than the first, it seems to me that His Hon. had got out of the wrong side of the bed the day he received them, or that they failed to please for some reason or another. I readily admit that, to an eye used only to watercolours, drawings which have been scratched by pen or had lights scraped off or put back on in body-colour may seem a little harsh. But there are also people who, just as it is sometimes pleasant and invigorating for a healthy constitution to go for a walk when a strong wind is blowing, so there are also art lovers, I say, who aren’t afraid of the harsh. Weissenbruch, for example, wouldn’t find these two drawings disagreeable or dull. In the circumstances, should I learn that C.M. would rather not have any more, of course I cannot and will not force them on His Hon., but I hope that, for example when you come, you will be able to find out how things really stand.  Naturally, although I hadn’t expected him to give me 10 guilders less for this batch than for the previous one, I agree with the 20 guilders, all the more so because I left it to His Hon. to fix the price. And if he wants me to start on another 6 or 12, I’m ready to do that because I don’t want to miss any opportunity to sell something. I really want to do my best to accommodate His Hon., because I think that it’s worth the effort as long as I get my rent out of it and can make ends meet more easily. It’s just that His Hon. himself talked about giving more, not less, for more detailed drawings. I only raise the matter, after all, mainly to know what to do as regards a new order that is or is not to follow. It may also be that His Hon. will write to me himself later. 
   In a few days, or today if I have time, I’ll send you a brief list of what is in my collection of wood engravings. I’m so sure you will take pleasure in them. While I spent less on paint this winter than others did, I had more expenses in connection with the study of perspective and proportion for an instrument described in a work by Albrecht Dürer and used by the Dutchmen of old. It makes it possible to compare the proportions of objects close at hand with those on a plane further away, in cases where construction according to the rules of perspective isn’t feasible. Which, if you do it by eye, will always come out wrong, unless you’re very experienced and skilled. I didn’t manage to make the thing the first time around, but I succeeded in the end after trying for a long time with the aid of the carpenter and the smith. And I think that with more work I can get much better results still. It would please me greatly if perhaps in your wardrobe there was a jacket and trousers suitable for me which you no longer wear.  Because if I buy something I like it to be as practical as possible for working in the dunes or indoors, but my clothes for going out are getting rather threadbare. And while I am not ashamed to be seen in the streets in a cheap suit when I go out to work, I am decidedly ashamed by gentleman’s clothes that give the impression of a gentleman down on his luck. My everyday clothes, however, aren’t at all shoddy, because now I have Sien to keep check of them and make minor repairs.  I end this letter by saying to you again that I so dearly wish that the family should not view my relationship with Sien as something of which there isn’t the slightest question, namely an intrigue. Which I would find unspeakably offensive and would only widen the gulf. What I hope is that they don’t interfere, with some ill-timed wisdom, to prevent me from being with her. I mean of the same sort as when Pa wanted to pack me off to Geel. The speculating about inheritances that you mention is quite out of the question, if only because there are no inheritances for me as far as I know, and indeed there cannot be for there is nothing. I believe there is literally no money at home. The only person from whom, in very different circumstances, I might perhaps have inherited something because I share his name, Uncle Cent, is someone with whom I have been on bad terms for many years on account of numerous things, and in such a manner that by the nature of the matter it cannot be resolved as if I were his protégé, because I myself certainly wouldn’t want that, and of course he hasn’t the slightest thought of any such thing any more, although I hope that, just like last year, if I meet His Hon. we shall not make a public scene. And now with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent 
   

 
 
Woodcuts12


1 
portfolio 
Irish characters, miners, factories, fishermen &c. for the most part small pen sketches.


1
,,
Landscapes and animals, Bodmer, Giacomelli, Lançon, also some landscapes    


1
,,
Labours of the fields by Millet, also Breton, Feyen-Perrin19 and English prints by Herkomer, Boughton, Clausen22 &c.


1
,,
Lançon


1
,,
Gavarni, supplemented with lithographs, but no rare ones


1
,,
Ed. Morin24


1
,,
G. Doré25


1
,,


Du Maurier, very numerous.
Chs Keene27 and Sambourne28
J. Tenniel, supplemented with the Beaconsfield cartoons. 

 illustrators 
          for Punch.




1
,,


1
,,


 
 
Missing here is John Leech, but this gap can easily be filled because there’s a reprint of his woodcuts that isn’t expensive.


1
,,
Barnard33


1
,,
Fildes34 and Charles Green35 &c.


1
,,
small French wood engravings, Album Boetzel36 &c.


1
,,
Scenes on board English ships and military sketches.


1
,,
Heads of the people by Herkomer, supplemented with drawings by others and by portraits


1
,,
Scenes from everyday London life, from the opium smokers38 and Whitechapel and The Seven Dials39 to the most elegant ladies and Rotten Row40 or Westminster Park. Together with corresponding scenes from Paris and New York, the whole forms a curious ‘Tale of those cities’.


1
 portfolio. 
The large prints from The Graphic, London News, Harper’s Weekly, L’Illustration &c. including Frank Holl, Herkomer, Fred Walker, P. Renouard, Menzel, Howard Pyle.


1
 portfolio. 
The Graphic portfolio, being a separate publication of impressions of several woodcuts, not  from the printing plates but the blocks themselves, among them the  Homeless and hungry by Fildes.


Several illustrated books, including Dickens and the Frederick the Great by Menzel, small edition.

 Municipal hospital (4th class, Ward 6, no. 9) Brouwersgracht. My dear Theo, Should you come here towards the end of June, I hope you’ll find me back at work, but at present I’m in hospital, although I’ll only be here for about a fortnight. For some 3 weeks I’d been suffering a good deal from sleeplessness and chronic fever, and felt pain on passing water. And now it turns out that I’ve got a very mild case of what’s known as ‘a dose of the clap’. So I have to stay quietly in bed, swallow a lot of quinine tablets and from time to time have instillations of pure water or alum water, thus as harmless as could be. There’s no reason for you to be in the least concerned about this, but as you know one has to take this sort of thing seriously and act immediately, because neglect can make it incurable or exacerbate matters. Take the case of Breitner, who’s still here, though in another ward, and will probably leave soon — he doesn’t know I’m here. I’d be grateful if you didn’t mention this, because people sometimes think it’s terribly serious or make it sound serious by telling exaggerated tales. Of course I’m telling you exactly what it is, and you needn’t keep silent if someone asks you directly, and in any event you needn’t worry. Naturally I had to pay for a fortnight in advance, 10. guilders for nursing costs. There’s no difference in food or treatment between those whose nursing is paid for by poor relief and those who pay the 10. guilders themselves. There are 10 beds in a ward, and I must say that the treatment is very good in every respect. I’m not bored, and the rest and proper, practical medical treatment are doing me good. 
   If it’s convenient, be so good as to send around 20 June to the above address, but not by registered letter, 50 francs without registering the letter. As you know, I received 100 francs on 1 June, so I’m taken care of in any event. If I have to stay longer, I’ll pay the extra and stay on, and otherwise I’ll have enough to carry on with.  I’d prefer to get back to work in a fortnight, of course, and I’ll be dying to go back to the dunes in a fortnight.  Sien comes to see me on visiting days and is keeping an eye on the studio. Now I must tell you that the day before I came here I received a letter from C.M. in which he writes a good deal about the ‘interest’ that he takes in me and which, he says, Mr Tersteeg has shown, but, he continues, he didn’t approve of how ungrateful I was for H.G.T.’s interest. So be it. I’m lying here completely calmly and quietly now, but I assure you, Theo, that I would be put in a very bad mood if someone again dished me up with the same sort of interest as H.G.T. on certain occasions. And when I think how His Hon. took that interest to the point of daring to compare me to an opium smoker, I’m still amazed that for my part I didn’t show my interest by telling him to go to hell. 
   Talking of smoking opium, the comfort and luxury, the sort of glory in which H.G.T. moves and the fairly strong doses of flattery that his visitors bring for him — those are things that perhaps befuddle His Hon. now and again more than he realizes.  In short, with all his superficially refined politeness, with his superficially civilized manners, his smart clothes and so on and so on, on consideration and also looking back on it, I find something malicious in His Hon.’s character. I wish it weren’t so, but I can’t say otherwise. I don’t doubt for a moment that His Hon. is a clever man, but another question comes first before I can respect him: is he a good man? Namely someone who doesn’t deliberately and on principle cultivate hatred, rancour, bickering and sarcasm inside himself. That is the question. I haven’t replied to C.M.’s last letter, nor shall I. I appreciate His Hon.’s telling me that he’ll also take something else later, no doubt out of interest too, but especially if he means it, which time will tell.  Another reason for not regretting lying here quietly for a few days is that, should I need it, I can get an official statement from the doctor here7 that I’m absolutely not the sort of person who should be sent to Geel8 or made a ward of court.  And if that isn’t enough, I can also get another, if I make an effort, from the professor in charge of the lying-in clinic in Leiden.
   But perhaps those people who might possibly get it into their heads to declare that the family or society would be so much better off if someone like me were to be declared mad or made a ward of court are so extraordinarily brilliant that in such cases they know far better than, for example, the doctor here. Anyway, a letter from you would of course give me great pleasure at the moment. Sien is getting ready to leave. I think of her a great deal — I expect her again later. May she come through it safely.  I resisted as long as I could and carried on working, but in the end I realized I needed to see a doctor urgently. But he told me just this morning that I would soon be rid of it. Did you get the two little drawings? Adieu with a handshake, and wishing you as much good fortune as anyone could deal with. Ever yours, Vincent I must tell you again that the precedent of Geel, at which time they were minded to make me a ward of court on physical grounds, makes it difficult for the family suddenly to change their story now and look for financial rather than physical reasons. Such arguments won’t hold water. Again, I hope they won’t go that far.  But write soon, for I’m longing for a letter. You do understand, Theo, that I don’t discuss family matters with the doctor here or the professor in Leiden — but because I’m being treated by the former and Sien by the latter, it will only take a word from me in the last resort to secure the testimony of these two gentlemen to set against any possible statements by a few people of which you spoke.  My dear Theo, Few things have given me so much pleasure recently as hearing reports from home just now that greatly reassure me as to their mood. Sien came to tell me that a package had arrived at my studio and I asked her to go and open it and see what was inside, and if there was a letter to bring it with her. That’s how I know that they’ve sent a whole package with all sorts of clothing, over- and underclothes, and cigars, and 10 guilders were enclosed with the letter.  I can’t tell you how it affected me, especially now — it’s better than I expected — but they still don’t know about one thing and another. Yet I’m greatly reassured.  I’m weak and faint, Theo, and I absolutely, absolutely must have rest if I’m to get better, so I welcome everything that means peace.  But before I lay here I was worse than now, and the main thing you should know now is that it isn’t bad, and only a short period of treatment here will be needed to get me back on my feet. 
   I wanted to let you know about Pa and Ma right away because I thought it would please you too. Sien will probably leave next Monday, for I believe that there’s no better place for her than in a hospital now, and she can be admitted around mid-June. But now she wanted to stay for my sake, but I don’t want that.  I have my perspective books2 here and a few volumes of Dickens, including Edwin Drood. There’s perspective in Dickens too. By Jove, what an artist. There’s no one to match him.  I hope that lying still for a little may have a good influence on my drawing, because sometimes you see things better when you aren’t able to work on them for a while, and everything seems new and fresh, so to speak, when you come back to it later. The view from the window of the ward is splendid to me: wharves, the canal with potato barges, the backs of houses being demolished, with workers, a bit of garden and in the next, more distant plane the quay with the row of trees 
   and lamp-posts, a complicated court with its gardens, and also all the roofs, all seen in a bird’s-eye view, but made mysterious in the evening and morning above all by the light effect like, for example, a Ruisdael or Vermeer.  But I’m not allowed to draw it, and couldn’t anyway as long as I’m so weak. But despite not being allowed to get out of bed, in the evening I can’t resist going over to look at it.  Write to me soon. It was so kind of home and gave me so much pleasure, especially now. The rest is doing me so much good and making me much calmer and taking away the nervousness I’ve suffered from so much recently. And here in the ward it’s no less fascinating for me than the 3rd-class waiting room. But I may not and cannot draw just yet.  Adieu, I hope you’ll write to me. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent 
   I thought it was so nice that this came from home, especially now, that I wanted to write to you directly. Also, needless to say, I don’t need any more clothes now. I’ve written home to thank them and to tell them I was here. You know the address is Hospital Brouwersgracht 4th Class Ward 6, No. 9. The Hague, 22 June My dear Theo, I received your letter of 12 June with the 50 francs enclosed in good order, and thank you sincerely for them. I haven’t replied before because I didn’t know what course my illness would take — it hasn’t improved as quickly as the doctor thought. I’ve now been here for over a fortnight and have again had to pay for a fortnight in advance, although if all goes well I’ll be allowed to leave in a week or 10 days and will then get part of my money back. This morning I spoke to the doctor and asked him if there was a complication that might become serious. No, he said, but the message was still rest and stay here. The treatment didn’t stop at instillations: he’s been rummaging about inside the bladder with a catheter, which isn’t particularly enjoyable. But it might perhaps be good for a great many people if they underwent this from time to time, because it’s a preventive measure for troublesome conditions that develop very, very slowly. But I assure you that I long dreadfully for a little greenery and some fresh air, for a thing like this makes you very weak and faint. I can’t draw because I must lie still almost continuously, although I have tried a few times; it makes me too feverish. I can read but I’ve run out of books. Anyway, it will come to an end, so I must be patient.  Sien is in Leiden, but I won’t hear any news of her until she has given birth. What does what we men have signify compared with the terrible suffering that women must endure in childbirth? They are our masters when it comes to suffering pain, but in other things we are the winners. Until the last day she was here she visited me regularly and brought me a little smoked meat or sugar or bread, which is now finished, leaving me feeling very faint. But now I’m so sorry that I can’t in turn 
   give her a tonic in Leiden, which she’d certainly welcome, for what you get there is only weak fare. I find it such an odd feeling not to be able to do anything and to watch the days passing so emptily. Sometimes I think I can do this or that, but find I’m too weak.  It pleases me greatly that you saw something in the drawings I sent2 — I laboured so hard on them, and on those for C.M. as well, in those last days when I felt so much more pain and anxiety than here. For the worst was before I came to this hospital, long before. And now I must tell you that I’ve had a letter from Rappard. Of course I had immediately returned the 2. guilders, and after that I received a reply from him in which he repeats what he said about my drawings in the studio, namely that he enjoyed them and found them sympathetic, mainly because of the conception, the sentiment and the intention. He suggested that if I had something similar I should send it to him, because he thought he could find a customer for it. You do understand that what I want most is for people to enjoy my work; that gives me such pleasure. For it’s so disheartening and stifling and crushing if you don’t even occasionally hear: this or that is right and felt and meant. It’s so exhilarating when you see that someone really does feel something of what you’ve tried to express. He was also pleased by a few nude studies.
   This is the first time for several days that I’ve sat up, and as I write I feel some life stirring. If only I were cured! If only I could settle myself as I need, how I would love to do some studies here in the wards. I’m now in a different ward with beds or cots without curtains, and especially in the evening or at night there are curious effects. The doctor is just the way I like, absolutely not Blom Coster. He resembles some heads by Rembrandt, a fine forehead and a very sympathetic expression. I hope to have learned something from him, in the sense that I hope to deal with models rather as he deals with patients, namely tackling them firmly, setting them shortly and sharply in the precise position required. It’s extraordinary how patient he is when rubbing, massaging and manipulating the sick himself in various ways. He’s far stronger than an orderly, and has the knack of allaying their embarrassments and positioning the people exactly as he needs them. There’s an old man who would make a superb St Jerome. A thin, tall, wiry, brown and wrinkled body with joints so outstandingly clear and expressive that it makes one sad not to have him as a model.  I can well imagine that Heyerdahl is delighted by such a payment. Now I must inform you that Pa visited me the first days that I was here, although very briefly and in great haste, and I wasn’t really able to talk about anything. I would rather he had visited at another time, when it could truly have been of more good for both of us. Now it was very strange for me, and seemed more or less like a dream — as does this whole business of lying here being ill. 
   I’ve seen no one apart from Sien, her mother and Pa, which is in fact all for the best, though the days are rather lonely and melancholy. Sometimes I can’t help thinking that life is now considerably more sombre and lonelier than, for example, when I first visited Mauve last winter. It gives me a stab of pain and an anxious feeling each time I think of it, even though I try to chuck the whole thought of it overboard as useless ballast.  I heard from the orderly that Breitner was discharged a few days ago. I believe that here in this class the doctor gives shorter shrift than in the more expensive ones. So much the better. Perhaps here9 they’re less hesitant about inflicting a little pain on the patients than in the higher wards, and more ready, for example, to stick a catheter in someone’s bladder without a lot of ‘good manners’ or compliments. Well, all the better in my view, and I repeat10 it’s as good here as in the 3rd-class waiting room. If only I could work! But I must take things as they are. I have a book by Dickens and my perspective books. I hope you’ll write again. You know the address is: Municipal hospital, Brouwersgracht
4th class. Ward 6, No. 9

 Adieu, a handshake in thought, and many thanks again for your loyal letter and the enclosure. I wish you well, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent I believe that when Sien had to go I became too nervous and then broke down, but there are times when one can’t always remain cool-headed. She’s lying there so alone, and I would so like to go there because these will be frightening days for her.  1 July 1882 My dear Theo, I’ve been back in my studio for a few hours and am writing to you immediately. I can’t tell you how wonderful it is to be better again, or how beautiful everything looked on the road from the hospital to here. And how the light seemed brighter and the spaces bigger, and all the objects and figures more important. There’s a ‘but’, though, and that ‘but’ is that I’ll again have a catheter or a thick lead probe in my bladder, for next Tuesday I have to go back to the doctor and tell him how I’ve been getting on, and he has prepared me for the fact that I may then have to go into hospital for another fortnight, possibly longer, possibly shorter, depending on what’s needed. At any rate I would be absolutely delighted if I didn’t have to go in again. As soon as I feel anything wrong I have to go back, and even if I don’t notice anything I’ll go on Tuesday to be examined again. The channel through which the urine passes must gradually be widened, but this can’t be forced or rushed. 
   The probes gradually become thicker, and each time a new one goes in everything is stretched a little further, and that’s painful, but above all extremely unpleasant, particularly because the thing is left in place for a time. Blood comes out when it’s removed, and then you feel relatively free for a few days, while the pain it causes disappears. I’m now here in one of those intervals. Meanwhile I can now pass water quite easily once more, which makes me feel on top of the world, as if it were something very special. But it must become entirely normal, and that will take time. Yet the sense of getting better makes you forget all the catheters and probes and instillations... until you see the doctor approaching with them again. And that isn’t a very pleasant moment. Well, such are the petty troubles of life. But what one might call a ‘great trouble’ is pregnancy and delivery — the latest letter from Sien was very melancholy. She hadn’t yet given birth but was expecting to at any hour, and I feel very worried, because this waiting has been going on for days. 
   It was chiefly to be able to visit her that I asked the doctor to change the walks in the garden into a short leave of absence, if it was at all possible. So tomorrow morning I’m going to see her with her mother and child, Sunday being the only day on which she’s allowed visitors. Her last letter to me wasn’t written by herself but by the nurse, who herself asked that we should come sometime. Yet we may still find that we aren’t allowed in. Poor lass, she’s full of courage and not easily frightened, but according to that last letter there was nothing in particular wrong except for inner frailty. I can’t tell you how I longed for her in the hospital and how I long for her now, and at times I wasn’t sorry that I had to cope with some suffering myself, rather than standing there in excellent health, for then it would have been very unevenly divided.  If all goes well, though, Sien will be back this month, may that prove to be the case. But the proverb says ‘A mother’s pains are long-lasting’. This casts a dark shadow over the wonderful feeling of getting better. I’m longing for tomorrow and dreading it at the same time.
   The first person I came across here in Schenkweg was my friend the carpenter, who has helped me on several occasions with one job or another to do with making instruments for perspective. And who’s also the foreman for the owner5 of the studio I wrote to you about. His boss was just at the yard (the drawing of which you have, with meadows in the distance), and they coaxed me into going along, and showed me how they had left the room that would be the studio unpapered pending my decision. I said I still couldn’t decide. Fine, said the man, but I could choose what I wanted from a batch of wallpapers, then he would put it up and I wouldn’t be under any obligation. And even though I said I didn’t want that, since I had to go back to the hospital, they’ve already started work, because they insist on showing me it before Tuesday. I must say the house is very comfortable and looks really large and smart. The huge, fully panelled attic alone would make a superb studio if need be, although the room facing north was going to be the studio. And the price is unusually low for here; in the city it would be about double. Three guilders a week for a large upstairs flat is very little, even in comparison with neighbourhoods like Noordwal or the Buitensingels. And the location is excellent for a painter. There’s one view from the attic window that’s enchanting. Still, I didn’t want to take a decision because both Sien and I are sick. But I’ll take the matter up again as soon as we’re better. There is air and space, wonderful to work in and keep healthy. Light from the north, and in the other room roughly from the south. There’s a small kitchen I really hope to draw a lot, also with a little window overlooking a sort of courtyard.  I mustn’t forget to tell you that, most unexpectedly, I had a visit in the hospital from Mr Tersteeg, which gave me great pleasure in one sense, although we didn’t talk about anything special, nor is that necessary. But I thought it very kind. Then a few days later Iterson came as well, about which I cared much less. And then Johan van Gogh, 
         who I thought was in Helvoirt but turns out to be living in Stationsweg these days. He told me that he, too, had had a bunch of catheters and other musical instruments in his bladder once. Given that he appears to be free of them now, I hope there’ll be an end to it in my case as well. It would be too bad if a person had such adornments for a long time — it would be hard to climb stairs or show yourself in public.  If you send me something at the beginning of this month, you should address the letter to the hospital. It will be all right, because the porter has promised me to keep letters if I’m away (this is allowed under hospital rules as long as one isn’t finally discharged and puts in a request). On Tuesday I have to pay for the hospital again, and the rent that I owe as well. But the finest thing of all about getting better is that my drawing is coming back to life, together with my feeling for things, which was drugged, so to speak, for a time, and was a great void. I again enjoy everything I see. And then, I haven’t smoked a pipe in about a month — that’s another old friend back. I can’t tell you with what pleasure I sit here again in the studio after spending so long in an environment of chamber-pots &c., even though the hospital is also beautiful, truly beautiful. Especially the garden with all the strollers, men, women, children. I have a few scratches, but as a patient you aren’t free to work as it ought to be done, and not up to it either.  Well, adieu, write soon, and believe me, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent Sunday afternoon My dear Theo, As I wrote to you yesterday, I went to Leiden. Sien gave birth last night, had a very difficult delivery but thank God she survived, together with a jolly nice little boy. Her mother and child and I went there together — you can imagine how tense we were, not knowing what we’d hear when we enquired after her from the nurse at the hospital, and how delighted we were to be told: gave birth last night but you mustn’t talk to her too much... I shan’t soon forget that ‘you mustn’t talk to her too much’, because that meant ‘you can still talk to her’ and might equally well have been ‘you will never speak to her again’. Theo, I was so happy when I saw her again, and she was lying right by the window with a view of the garden full of sun and greenery in a sort of exhausted drowse in between sleeping and being awake, and then she looked up and saw us all. Ah, old chap, she had such a look on her face and she was so glad to see us, and because by chance we were there exactly 12 hours after it happened, while visitors are allowed only 1 hour a week. And she was so cheered up and came to her senses in every respect in a second, and asked about everything. 
   But what I can’t get over is the child, in particular because although it was delivered with forceps it wasn’t the least bit harmed, and lay in its cradle with a sort of air of worldly wisdom. They’re so clever, those doctors. By all accounts it was a critical situation. There were 5 professors present when it happened, and she was given chloroform. Before that she had endured an enormous amount because the baby was stuck from 9 in the evening until half past one. And she’s still in considerable pain. But she forgot it all when she saw us, and even said to me that we’d soon be drawing again, and I have absolutely no objection if her prediction proves entirely accurate. There’s no tearing or anything, which can easily happen in such a case.  By Jove, I’m so thankful. But the sombre shadow still threatens, and the master Albrecht Dürer knew that when he placed Death behind the young couple in the wonderful etching you know. But we must hope that the sombre shadow remains only a shadow that will pass. Well, Theo, as you well know, if I hadn’t had your help Sien probably wouldn’t be here. Another thing — I asked Sien 
   to ask the professor to give her a proper examination, because she often has what they call a white discharge. He did so, and advised her on what she must do to be completely cured.  And he says that she had been at death’s door more than once, especially during her previous throat illness, in an earlier miscarriage, and then last winter, that she has been profoundly weakened by a life of turmoil and agitation, year after year, that now that she no longer needed to lead that life she’d recover of her own accord, provided there are no complications, with rest, tonics, plenty of fresh air and no heavy labour. When she’s past her old misery, there will be a completely new period in her life: she won’t get back her spring — that is over, and was cruel anyway — but her second growth can be all the fresher. You know how, in the middle of summer when the greatest heat has passed, the trees throw out fresh young shoots, a new layer of young green over the old, faded one.  I’m sitting writing to you next to Sien’s mother at a window looking out on a sort of courtyard. 
   I’ve drawn it twice, once large and once smaller. C.M. has both and they were the ones, especially the large one, that Rappard liked. I’d like you to see them if you visit C.M. because I would particularly like to know what you think of the large one. When are you coming?  I long to see you. Well brother, you have it on your conscience that I’m so happy today that it made me cry. Thanks for everything, old chap, and believe me, with a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent Tuesday afternoon My dear Theo, A message from Sien that all is going well, thank God. If that continues, she should leave a fortnight after the birth. This forced me to make a decision about the new house, so that she’d find a warm nest on her return after so much pain. So I reached an understanding with the owner. First, that right away he’d help me move, namely by letting me have a few men from the yard2 at the end of an afternoon to carry all my things, because I’m not allowed to lift much, in fact nothing at all. And then that I won’t pay him any rent until either I or the woman actually moves in, for Sien may be back from hospital before I am. Meanwhile I must reach an agreement with the previous landlord3 for the current month (because I was ill and didn’t know when I would be better, I was unable to give him notice that I was leaving). I hope to get away with paying for 1 week or a fortnight, anyway I’m not planning to give him the whole month. 
   Perhaps you’ve already sent something – then maybe I’ll find your letter tomorrow morning with the hospital porter. But if you haven’t yet sent, I would ask you to please do so soon because I’m running short and must pay 10 guilders in advance to go back into hospital, so that my going back there depends on your letter. This morning there was still no letter with the porter. Now the move is largely done. Sien’s mother is helping me. It’s quite a job, because the whole house is still full of plaster dust and needs to be scrubbed. But the studio and alcove are clean, and nearly all the furniture &c. has been brought over. Now we’re taking a break to eat. I’m fine, I feel much better than I’ve done for a long time, but my nether parts are still not completely in order when I pass water. Although walking, being out of doors &c. agrees with me. Yesterday I spoke briefly to the director of the hospital, Dr Tienhoven, in the street and told him how I was getting on, and he made no objection. So I have hopes of being fully cured soon. 
   If I had designed this new house myself, and had deliberately wanted to fit it out as a studio, I couldn’t have made it better than it is now. And not another house in the street is like this one inside, although from the outside they all look exactly the same. The fact that I’m in it is really the fault of the storm that broke the window of the old studio, for if that hadn’t happened I would never have known about this house. It was on that occasion that the carpenter drew it to my attention and said, why don’t you move next door? Well brother, and during the move I’ve dashed off another drawing, a watercolour again. Based on a sketch done before my illness that was only half finished. So it’s coming to life again. It shows pinks on the beach, big hulls 
   of boats lying in the hot sand with the sea very far off in a blue mist or haze, for it was a day with sun, but it’s with the light behind, not into it, so that you have to feel the sun through a few short cast shadows and the shimmering of the warm air above the sand. It’s only an impression but I believe it’s fairly accurate. My fingers are itching so much to get back to work, and needless to say I would rather have gone to Scheveningen than to the hospital. Still, what must be must be.  Now I’m longing for your letter and even more for your arrival — provided I’m not then in the hospital. And for what you’ll say about the new house. And for what you’ll think of Sien when you see her, and of the new little clever-clogs. I do hope you’ll feel some sympathy for Sien, because she deserves it. Another thing… Might there be any more Ingres paper of the same thickness as the enclosed sample in your part of the world, ideally with slightly more tone? If so, bring some when you come, together with those of my sketches that you have but don’t want to keep. Of course I hope that you’ll definitely keep Sorrow and the best of them, and the large Sorrow. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother,  Having received your letter and the 100 francs enclosed, I thank you most sincerely and feel the need to write to you again straightaway. Because I think it would be a good idea if I explained, honestly and to the best of my knowledge and with all the earnestness in me, some matters which it’s important you should be fully aware of and understand. So I hope that you’ll read this letter at your ease and with patience, because for me so much depends on it. Tomorrow morning I’m going back to the hospital and I’ll lay my head down there calmly1 if I know that you’ve been informed about everything as fully and clearly as the distance permits. I would much, much rather that you’d been present, so that I could have shown you everything here this afternoon and discussed it with you. But let’s hope that will happen in August. Before going on to various other matters, I must tell you that I was very taken by one passage in your letter describing Paris by night. Because it evoked a memory of myself when I too saw ‘Paris all grey’ and was struck by that so very curious effect, with the little black figure and the distinctive white horse that brings out the delicacy of those curious greys exactly like that. That touch of dark and that tonal white2 are the key to the harmony. But in the hospital just recently, as it happens, an artist who described that Paris all grey with the hand of a master made a great impression on me. In ‘Une page d’amour’ by Emile Zola I found several townscapes painted or drawn in a masterly, masterly fashion3 — entirely in the sentiment of the simple passage in your letter. And that small book by him is why I’m very definitely going to read everything by Zola, of whom I had only known a few fragments up to now: 1 for which I attempted to make an illustration, ‘Ce que je veux’, and another piece 
   describing an old peasant that was exactly like a drawing by Millet. You have something mightily artistic in you, brother — cultivate it — let it first put down roots one way or another and then flower — don’t give it to just anyone — but seriously, for yourself, think about it, and don’t consider it a misfortune if it concentrates itself through that thinking and comes to occupy quite an important place in your activity. But I may be venturing into forbidden territory, so no more about that for today. Only, again, there is ‘drawing’ in your short description — for me palpable and comprehensible, even though you haven’t yet pursued your impression to the point where it would acquire a more robust body and stand on its feet visibly or palpably for everyone. The true pain and tension of creating begins at the point where you let go of the description – but you have the intelligence of creating in damned good measure. Now you can’t go any further because you don’t yet believe in yourself in this respect, otherwise you would take the plunge, that’s to say venture further. But enough. There’s a certain je ne sais quoi in your description, a scent — a memory — of a watercolour by Bonington, for example, only it’s still faint as if in a mist. Do you know that drawing in words is also an art, and sometimes betrays a hidden force latent inside, just as the blue or grey cloud of smoke betrays the hearth? I most certainly do appreciate what Pa and Ma did during my illness – you remember I wrote to you about it right away — as much as I value the visit by H.G.T. However, that’s not why I didn’t immediately write to Pa and Ma about Sien or anything else, and only sent a brief word to tell them of my recovery. And here’s why. Because something is left of what happened last summer and this winter that marks the line between past and present like an iron barrier. 
   It isn’t in the least my intention to go in the same manner as last year to Pa and Ma to ask their advice or opinion, because it became clear to me then that there was a sharp difference in way of thinking and attitude to life. Nonetheless, it is my ardent desire to keep the peace and to convince Pa and Ma that it wouldn’t be right if they were to turn against me, in the belief that I was someone who only dreamed and didn’t know how to act — that, I say, they are mistaken in their view that my approach to situations is so impractical as to make it necessary for them to ‘guide’ me. You see, Theo, believe me, I don’t say this out of bitterness, contempt or disdain for Pa and Ma — or to glorify myself — but only to help you grasp one fact, namely this. Pa and Ma aren’t the sort of people to understand me — neither my faults nor my better side — they can’t put themselves in my position. Reasoning with them only leads to quarrels. What’s to be done??? Here’s my plan, which I hope you will approve. I hope to arrange things so that, next month for example, I can put aside 10 guilders, or preferably 15. Then — but not before — I want to write to Pa and Ma that I have something to say to them, that I invite Pa to repeat his journey at my expense and to stay with me for a few days.  I want to show him Sien and her baby, which he won’t be expecting, as well as the house bright and the studio with all manner of work in progress, and myself, by then fully recovered, I hope.  In my view all this will have a better and deeper and more desirable effect 
   than words or writing. I’ll tell him briefly how Sien and I struggled through her anxious pregnancy last winter — how you helped and still help us loyally, even though you only heard about Sien later. That for me she is priceless, first through the love and attachment between us that circumstances have strengthened, and second because from the start she has devoted herself utterly, with great good will, intelligence and practical skill, to helping me in my work. And that she and I dearly hope that Pa will approve of my having taken her as my wife. I can’t put it any other way than ‘having taken’, because the formality of marriage is not what makes her my wife, since this is a bond that already exists — a feeling from both sides that we love, understand and help each other. As for what Pa will say about marrying itself, I believe he’ll say, ‘Marry her’.  I would like Pa to have a fresh and clear impression of a new future for me, to see me here in surroundings very different from what he may imagine, for him to be completely reassured about my feelings towards him, for him to have confidence in my future and put wardship or Geel a thousand miles from his thoughts. You see, Theo, I know of no more direct or honest way or means than what I’ve described to restore relations soon and in a practical fashion. Write and let me know your feelings about this. 
   Now, furthermore, I don’t think it superfluous to tell you again, although it’s difficult to express, what I feel for Sien. I have a sense of being at home when I’m with her, a sense that she brings my ‘hearth and home’ with her, a sense that we have grown together. This is an intensely deep feeling, serious and not without the dark shadow of her and my fairly sombre pasts, a shadow I’ve written to you about before, as if, indeed, something sombre continues to threaten us against which our life must be a constant struggle. At the same time, though, I feel a great calm and clarity and cheerfulness at the thought of her and of the straight path lying before me.  You know that last year I wrote to you a great deal about Kee Vos — so that, it seems to me, you have a clear picture of what took place within me. Don’t think that I exaggerated my feelings to you — it was a strong, passionate love I felt for her, unlike that for Sien. When I discovered in Amsterdam that she had a sort of dislike for me, which I didn’t think was the case, to such an extent that she regarded my behaviour as coercion and wasn’t even prepared to see me, but ‘that she went out of the door of her own house as long as I was inside it’, then — but not before — my love for her received a mortal blow. Which I first became aware of when, recovering from my intoxication as it were, I was in The Hague this winter. At that time there was a sense of inexpressible melancholy in me which I find impossible to describe. I know that I then thought very, very often of a manly remark by père Millet: ‘It has always seemed to me that suicide is the act of a dishonest man’.
   The emptiness, the inexpressible wretchedness inside, made me think — yes, I can understand why there are people who jump into the water — it’s just that I was far from approving of what those people did, and I found solidity in the words I’ve quoted, and thought it much the better approach to get hold of oneself and seek a medicine in work. The way, as you know, I tackled it then.  It’s difficult, terribly difficult, indeed impossible, to think of something like my passion of last year as an illusion. That’s what Pa and Ma do, but I say, ‘Even if it will never be, it could have been’. It wasn’t an illusion, but the attitudes differed and the turn taken by circumstances was such that the ways diverged further and further instead of coming together.  This is how I see it — these are my clear and honest thoughts — it could have been but now it never can be. Was Kee Vos right to have a dislike for me, was I wrong to persist? I declare I do not know. And it isn’t without pain and sorrow that I think back on it and write about it. I would like so much to understand better why Kee Vos was like that then and how it was that my parents and hers were so adamantly ominous and opposed, not so much through their words — although very certainly through them too, above all indirectly in the meaning more than the form — as through their complete lack of genuine, warm, living sympathy. I can’t soften these words, but I think of it as a mood of theirs that I would rather forget. Now, in the circumstances, it’s like a large, deep wound in me that has healed but is still palpable. 
   At that time — in that winter — could I feel ‘love’ again straight afterwards? Certainly not. But was it wrong that the human feeling in me wasn’t extinguished or numbed, and that my sorrow indeed aroused a need for compassion with others??? I think not. So at first Sien was a fellow human being to me, as alone and unhappy as I was. Yet, not being in despair, I was in the right state of mind to be able to give her some practical support, which at the same time was a stimulus to me to carry on. But gradually, slowly, something else developed between her and me. A certain need for each other. So that she and I stayed close together, entering each other’s lives more and more, and then it was love.  Theo, I must perhaps touch on a point that may be painful for you that may make you understand what I mean. In the past you had what Pa and Ma also call an ‘illusion’ for a woman of the people, and the fact that nothing came of it wasn’t because you couldn’t take that path in life but because things took a different course, and you have since adapted to life in another class where you are now firmly established, so that for you it wouldn’t again be an illusion if you wanted to marry a girl from your class. In your case that wouldn’t arouse any comment, and although nothing came of that first love, something might come of a new love, and you would succeed. In my opinion, your way is definitely not to take a woman of the people: with you the so-called illusion was the woman of the people; the reality for you has now become the woman from the same kind of class as Kee Vos. For me, though, it’s the other way round: the illusion (ALTHOUGH I DON’T BELIEVE THAT WORD OR DEFINITION WAS APPROPRIATE OR ACCURATE, EITHER IN YOUR CASE OR MINE) was Kee Vos; the reality has become the woman of the people. 
   There’s a difference between your case and mine in several respects. Your failure was when you were twenty, mine last year. But although both you and I may have had an illusion, failure or whatever — I really don’t know what to call it — that doesn’t rule out something more real, either for you or for me. For I’m quite sure that neither of us is cut out to be celibate.  What I want to make clear is this: what there is between Sien and me is real; it’s not a dream, it is reality. I count it a great blessing that my thoughts and capacity for work have found a focus, a particular direction. While it may be that I felt more passion for Kee Vos, and that in some respects she was more charming than Sien, it is certainly not so that the love for Sien is therefore less sincere, for the circumstances are too grave, and it all comes down to taking action and being practical, and that has always been so since I first met her.  You can see what the result is... now if you come you won’t find me dejected or melancholy, but you’ll enter a setting with which I believe you’ll be satisfied, or at least like. A young studio, a still young, fully functioning household. Not a mystical or mysterious studio, but one that has rooted itself in real life. A studio with a cradle and a close-stool. Where there’s no stagnation and everything prompts and urges and generates activity. 
   Now if someone or other comes to tell me that I’m a poor financier, I’ll show him my place here. I’ve done my best, brother, to ensure that you can see (and not just you, but everyone with eyes in his head) that I strive and sometimes manage to tackle things practically. HOW TO DO IT.  This winter we had the woman’s pregnancy and my expenses in getting settled. Now the woman has given birth, I’ve been ill for four weeks — and still not better — despite all that the place is clean and cheerful and bright and tidy, and I have a large part of my furniture, bedding and painting materials.  It has cost what it cost, to be sure I won’t underestimate it, but your money hasn’t gone down the drain. A young studio has come from it which can’t yet do without your help, but from which more and more drawings will gradually emerge and which requires only essential furniture and tools, which retain their value.  You see, old chap, if you come here now 
 0  to a house full of life and activity, knowing that you are its founder — won’t that give you a proper sense of satisfaction, more so than if I were a celibate spending my life in bars? Would you have it otherwise??? You know that I wasn’t always happy, and sometimes truly wretched, and now through your help my youth is emerging, and my true development.  Now I just hope that you won’t lose sight of this great change, even when people think you’re mad to have helped or to help me. And that you’ll continue to see in the present drawings the seed of later ones. A little longer in the hospital and then I’ll go back to work, and the woman and child will pose.  It’s as clear as daylight to me that one must feel what one makes, that one must live in the reality of family life if one wants to portray family life intimately — a mother and child, a washerwoman, a seamstress, whatever. 
 1  As a result of stubborn labour, the hand is gradually becoming obedient to that feeling. But if I were to snuff out this feeling, and the strength to have my own household, that would be suicide. That’s why I say — onward — despite dark shadows, cares and difficulties, also, alas, through people interfering and gossiping. Theo — make no mistake — although I, as you rightly say, stay out of it, it often pierces me to the soul. But do you know why I no longer argue with them and why I stay out of it? — because I must work and may not let myself be diverted from my path by the gossip and difficulties.  But I don’t stay out of it because I’m afraid of them or am at a loss for words. Also, I’ve often noticed that they say nothing in my presence, and even claim never to have said anything. As for you, knowing that I don’t get involved in order not to make myself nervous and because of my work, you’ll be able to understand my attitude and not think it cowardly of me, won’t you?  Don’t imagine that I think myself perfect — or that I believe it isn’t my fault that many people find me a disagreeable character. I’m often terribly and cantankerously melancholic, irritable — yearning for sympathy as if with a kind of hunger and thirst — I become indifferent, sharp, and sometimes even pour oil on the flames if I don’t get sympathy. I don’t enjoy company, and dealing with people, talking to them, is often painful and difficult for me. 
 2  But do you know where a great deal if not all of this comes from? Simply from nervousness — I who am terribly sensitive, both physically and morally, only really acquired it in the years when I was deeply miserable. Ask a doctor and he’ll immediately understand entirely how it couldn’t be otherwise than that nights spent on the cold street or out of doors, the anxiety about coming by bread, constant tension because I didn’t really have a job, sorrow with friends and family were at least 3/4 of the cause of some of my peculiarities of temperament — and whether the fact that I sometimes have disagreeable moods or periods of depression couldn’t be attributable to this? But neither you nor anyone else who takes the trouble to think about it will, I hope, condemn me or find me unbearable because of that. I fight against it, but that doesn’t alter my temperament. And even if I consequently have a bad side, well damn it, I have my good side as well, and can’t they take that into consideration too? Write to me to say whether you approve of my little plan for telling Pa and Ma and establishing better relations. I don’t feel in the least like just writing about it or going to discuss it, and would probably then make my usual mistake of putting it in such a way that they take offence at some expression or other. There you are. I think when the woman is back with her child, I fully recovered and back from the hospital, the studio working, then I would like to say to Pa: come and resume your visit and stay with me for a few days to talk things over. And then send the travel expenses as a courtesy. I can’t think of a better plan. Adieu, thank you for everything, and a handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent  Thursday My dear Theo, It’s now the evening before I go back to the hospital and I don’t know what they’ll say there — perhaps I’ll be there only briefly, perhaps they’ll use their probes again and I’ll have to rest in bed for several days. So I’m writing again from home. It’s so silent and peaceful now here in the studio — it’s already late — but outside a gale is blowing and it’s raining — that makes the calm inside all the greater. Brother, how I wish I had you here at this silent hour — how much I would have to show you. The studio looks so authentic, it seems to me: plain, grey-brown wallpaper, scrubbed floorboards, muslin fixed to laths in front of the windows, everything bright. And of course the studies on the wall, an easel on each side, and a big pine-wood work-table. Adjoining the studio is a sort of alcove where the drawing boards, portfolios, boxes, sticks, &c. are, and also where all the prints lie. And in the corner a cupboard with all the little pots and bottles, and also all my books. Then the little living room with a table, some kitchen chairs, a paraffin stove, a big wicker armchair for the woman in the little corner by the window overlooking the yard and meadows familiar to you from the drawing, and next to it a small iron cradle with a green coverlet. I can’t look at the last piece of furniture without emotion, for it’s a strong and powerful emotion that grips a person when one has sat beside the woman one loves with a child in the cradle near her. And even if it was a hospital where she lay and I sat with her, it’s always that eternal poetry of Christmas night with the baby in the manger as the old Dutch painters conceived of it, and Millet and Breton — — — that light in the darkness — a brightness in the midst of a dark night. So I’ve hung the big etching after Rembrandt above it — those two women beside the cradle, one reading from the Bible by the light of a candle, while the great cast shadows put the whole room in deep chiaroscuro.
   I’ve hung up other prints there as well, and all very beautiful: Christus Consolator by Scheffer, a photo after Boughton, The sower and The diggers by Millet, The bush by Ruisdael, and splendid, big wood engravings by Herkomer and Frank Holl and The paupers’ pew by Degroux. Now in the small kitchen I have the very basic necessities, but such that if the woman recovers before me she can find all the essentials and cook something in 10 minutes, in short so that she can see that she has been thought about a great deal, and she will enter a house with flowers in the window where she will sit. And upstairs in the large attic a big bedstead for her and me, and my old one for the child with all the bedding in good order.  But you mustn’t imagine that I bought all of this at once. In the winter we’d already begun buying one thing and another, bit by bit, even though I didn’t know at the time what course it would take or where we’d end up. And now, thank God, the outcome is that the little nest is ready for her after all her pain.  However, her mother and I have made a huge effort in the last few days, she especially. The most difficult thing was the bedding — all made or altered by us — bought straw, bought eel-grass, ticking &c. and stuffed the beds ourselves in the attic. Otherwise it would have been too expensive. And now, after paying off my old landlord, I still have 40 guilders left after what you sent me. Admittedly, tomorrow I’ll have to pay 10 guilders of that to the hospital, but in return I’ll get food and medical treatment for a fortnight. So that this month, even though it includes my entire move and settling in and Sien’s return after her confinement with all that that involved, such as a cradle &c., I’ll get by without your having to send more than usual.  Alone, one is sure to perish, only with another can one be saved. I believe this saying to be true and I’m basing my life on it; is it a mistake and a miscalculation? 
   You see, brother, I’ve thought of you so very much recently, first because everything I possess is really yours, including my zest for life and energy, because through your help I can move and I feel my capacity for work returning. But I also think of you often for another reason. I remember how I came home not long ago to a house that wasn’t yet a real home with all the emotion of now, where two great empty spaces stared at me day and night. There was no woman, there was no child. I don’t believe there was less suffering as a result, but I do believe there was less love.  And on the street those two empty spaces accompanied me right and left, at work and everywhere and all the time. There was no woman, there was no child.  You see, I don’t know whether you know that feeling, when you’re alone at certain moments, that causes one to feel a kind of sigh or lament rising up from within: My God, where is my woman, my God, where is my child — is being alone living? When I think of you, I believe I’m not mistaken in thinking that in you too, though perhaps less passionately and nervously than in me, the same sadness must be present in some measure, at least at times. And I don’t know whether you believe I’m right or wrong, seeing correctly or incorrectly, when I say that I sometimes think of you this way. However, there’s something I believe about you and know about myself despite my nervousness — that in any event there is in your character and mine a basis of serenity, serenity in spite of everything, and that therefore neither you nor I is unhappy, because 
   that serenity arises from the fact that we truly and rightly love our occupation and work, and that art occupies a large place in our thoughts and makes life interesting. So it’s certainly not my intention to make you melancholy, but to help you understand my action and outlook on life through something in your own state of mind. I’m thinking now of Pa — do you believe Pa would remain cool and still object — in front of a cradle? You see, a cradle isn’t like anything else — there’s no flim-flam involved — and whatever may have been in Sien’s past, I know no other Sien than the one of this winter, than the mother from the hospital whose hand pressed mine when we both felt our eyes getting moist as we looked at the baby we were so anxious about this winter.  And just listen, between ourselves, without being preachy, it may be true that there is no God here, but there must be one not far off, and at such a moment one feels His presence. To say which is the same as saying — and for my part I would gladly exchange it for the straightforward statement — I believe in a God and that it is his will that man should not live alone but with a woman and with a child, if everything is to be normal. And what I hope is that you’ll understand my action and take it for what it is, namely natural, and not regard it as a case of deceiving or being deceived. And, old chap, when you come — and if you can, come and look soon — see Sien as I do, as a mother and an ordinary housewife and nothing else. For that’s what she really is, and in my view all the better for having seen the other side of life. The latest things I’ve bought are a few plates, forks, spoons, knives, because neither Sien nor I had any until now. I thought 3 people so 3 sets, but then I thought — and another for Theo or for Pa when they come to have a look. So your spot by the window and your place with us are open and waiting for you I only mean to say — after all, you will come without question... and Pa too. I think it was wise and discreet of you not to say anything to Pa and Ma up to now. The birth is now behind us, the flowers come out again, and up to now it was better not to involve Pa and Ma. I mean, I thought it best to keep the thorns for myself and to show Pa and Ma only the rose. So when the woman is back and I’m better, I would like to talk about it in the way I described to you — and if they ask you, I believe that now you can say something. Adieu, sleep well. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Friday evening. My dear Theo, I’m adding a word today to my enclosed letter of yesterday evening. And can tell you that I’ve been to the doctor at the hospital and he said that since I had been feeling quite well recently I needn’t come back unless it got worse.  While not completely normal and not entirely free of pain, the fact that I was able to pass water regularly on those days is proof that things are on the mend.  So, this afternoon I at once sent a drawing (not to the director) as a small gesture to the doctor who treated me. It was a Scheveningen woman knitting that I did at Mauve’s studio14 and in fact the best watercolour I had, largely because Mauve had added some touches and repeatedly came across to draw my attention to one point or another while I was working. I would have liked to keep it as a souvenir, but with that delightful feeling of getting better I wanted to show my gratitude.  I received a letter from Pa and Ma today and wrote to them as soon as I heard that I needn’t go back.  Now tomorrow I’d like to take a trip to Scheveningen by tram and do some drawing on the beach. 
   Following His Hon.’s visit, I also wrote a line to Mr Tersteeg to say that I was out and to thank him for his unexpected visit.  I’d like to go to see the woman on Sunday. I’ve had a note from her saying that yesterday she was allowed to get up for half an hour for the first time, and that the baby is also doing well.  I still get tired and weary remarkably quickly, which comes from having had to stay quiet and lie in bed for so long, and that’s a strange feeling. But in many respects I feel well and healthier than last winter. And I feel in such good spirits and thankful for many things.  I hope you’ll be able to find half an hour one of these days to write and say whether you approve of my plan as to how to tell Pa and Ma. But first the woman must get stronger, because she mustn’t be subjected to any emotions from without now, or be tense about anything for the time being, most decidedly not. But in a month or six weeks, depending on how she progresses.  She saw Pa when he came because it was the visiting hour and she was sitting downstairs in the corridor waiting, but of course Pa didn’t know her. It’s already late and I wanted to get up early tomorrow and go out quietly with my drawing materials as if nothing had happened between now and the last time I was sitting in the dunes at Scheveningen. I would like to succeed in making something for Rappard.  Adieu Theo, sleep well, how wonderful it is to be back in one’s normal routine. I wish you well and good fortune, and what I wish you above all in large measure is that serenity. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent P. S. That Emile Zola is a superb artist. I’m now reading ‘Le ventre de Paris’, it’s mightily clever. So my address is now Schenkweg 136. My dear Theo, On Friday I received a message from the hospital in Leiden to say that Sien could go home on Saturday. So I went there today and we came back together and she’s now here at Schenkweg — so far everything is fine, both with her and the baby. Fortunately, she has good milk, the baby is quiet.  I would have given a lot to have you see her today. Her appearance has changed enormously, I assure you, since this winter. It’s a complete transformation.  I may have had something to do with that this winter, through your help of course, but much, much more of the credit must go to the professor who treated her. But in turn the professor had less to do with the effect on her of the strong attachment between her and me. A woman changes when she loves and is loved; if there’s no one who cares for them the drive and charm goes. It brings out what is in her, and her development most decidedly depends on this. Nature must run its course, follow its normal way. What a woman wants is to be with one man and to stay with him for good. That’s not always possible, but if it is otherwise it goes against nature. So she now has a different look compared to last winter, her eyes are different, her gaze is now steady and calm, and there’s an expression of happiness in her, of peace and rest, which is all the more striking because of course she’s still in pain. I’ve written to you before that the shape of her head, the line of her profile, is precisely that of that figure by Landelle, the Angel of the passion. So that’s far from ordinary, 
       it’s decidedly noble, but it isn’t always immediately apparent. But today it was precisely, precisely that. Before she left, the professor (who has taken a liking to her3 — also knows her from the past — and gave her special attention this time — and examined her completely and thoroughly at her request, prompted by what I had agreed with her before she went there) took the trouble to have a long talk with her and give her detailed information about what she must do to stay on top of things.  1°   Be with one man, since her whole constitution and  temperament make her suitable for domestic life and decidedly unsuited  to the kind of life she was brought to by her past misery.
2    That she must be out of doors often, and do plenty of walking as soon  as she’s strong enough — breathe in lots of air and freshness.
3    As to food, he told her what she must eat and what isn’t good for her.
4    She must wash often with cold water and brandy, and regularly take a hot bath every week.
5    She must avoid emotions that make her nervous: anxiety, tension, agitation.
6    No scrubbing floors or similar really hard work,  especially not with the head lowered as when mopping a corridor, also  especially no lifting of heavy objects.
 Thus broadly what he’d already said before, only now he explained it to her in more detail. It’s clear to me from everything that he takes a special interest in her. Naturally, he also talked to her about me at some length; knows about my illness, and says I was quite right to go to the hospital, even told her exactly how he thinks I got it; not once but repeatedly he came back to whether she was really with me permanently – whether I wouldn’t leave her in the lurch – and when 
   she continued to reassure him, even when he said that she was just fooling him, he ended by saying, well, if you’ve really got your man for good, you’ve gained a great deal. He kept hammering on the point that she must have a domestic, regular and quiet life. When she left, not only the nurse on the ward where she was but also the head nurse herself came to say goodbye. I was there, and since I had had three letters from this person telling me how things were going when Sien wasn’t allowed to write, I thanked her for that. And she stayed talking to us for quite a long time. Fortunately, it was very warm, fine weather and the journey went well. Sien’s mother and Sien’s little girl had gone to Schenkweg and were waiting for us. It really was a lovely homecoming, and Sien was in high spirits over everything, especially over the cradle, over her wicker chair, over everything. But above all she was delighted to see her little girl again, who had received a new pair of boots from me for the occasion and looked very nice.  In May there was a combination of difficulties, her confinement, my illness, and this was complicated by the question of what to do, where she was to go. In many respects, light and a resolution have come.  She’s now still in considerable pain at times, mainly as a consequence of the operation with forceps, and there are other necessary effects of her confinement. There’s the great weakness, but one can see from her appearance that she’s undergoing a renewal and a blossoming, a recovery of her body and a recovery of her soul at the same time. And here there is now an atmosphere of ‘home’, or ‘Home’a or ‘hearth and home’. I can understand that Michelet says ‘Woman is a religion’. She’ll probably continue to be in pain for at least 6 weeks after the birth, and mustn’t overdo things at all. I believe that you can see, for example, from the interest taken in her by the professor and the head nurse that she’s someone for whom serious people feel a sympathy, because it really is something special for them to have cosseted her so much. When I was in the maternity ward and saw various other patients, it struck me that she was a very different type of person from the others, though she’s simple enough. Only there’s more spirit and sensitivity in her; one can see that suffering and going through hard times 
   have refined her.  I hope you won’t feel any scruples about meeting her.  I’ve been greatly entertained by what Sien has told me of her conversations with the professor. It really was amusing, and the man seems to go about his work with a good deal of bonhomie. For example, he said: tell me, do you enjoy a glass of bitters and can you smoke cigars? Yes, she replied. I ask, he said, in order to tell you that you don’t need to give that up. On the other hand, she got a terrible dressing down about using vinegar, mustard and pepper.  On days when she feels more thirst than hunger, as often happens, she is to take a glass of bitters as a medicine to stimulate the appetite.  He has given her the list of restoratives, having consulted her as to her means. I’ll also keep to what he recommends in this respect. Meat is good for her, but once or twice a week is actually enough; it certainly isn’t required every day.  Her principal remedy, her most important restorative, was having a home; he kept coming back to that. I had been rather concerned that Sien might need things that would prove expensive, but the kind of life that he has prescribed is also the thriftiest one could imagine. So I really do believe we’ll be able to manage on 150 francs a month.  Sien was also told that for a period of 2 years she can consult the professor in Leiden free of charge if her child is ill, and also get free medicines there for him. My concern, child, is not just to get you through your confinement, said the professor, but also in a year or so I hope to see you a strong, vigorous woman. You have a whole life ahead of you if you don’t ignore what I say. In short, he talked to her and gave her information as if he were her own father, in large things and in small. And so she came home much more cheerful and clear-headed than when she left. 
   I am well, but I’ve noticed that I’ve become quite weak; this will pass, though. But it isn’t surprising if you reckon that for over two months I have had and still have, to some extent, for instance, poor digestion, little appetite, chronic fever, &c. Passing water was much better until a few particularly raw, wet days had a rather adverse effect on me. For several days the stream on passing water was again strong and, so to speak, entirely normal. While that hasn’t completely continued since, it’s nevertheless a sign of progress, it seems to me, and if the weather stays dry and warm like today it will progress more rapidly. I’ve been drawing again, and although it gave me a headache and soon tired me out, it will gradually improve. Especially since little by little I’ll be able to resume posing the woman and child at home. My weakness is a disappointment, but the sort of things I had always have that effect.  The two drawings I’ve done in the past few days are both watercolours. Because I wanted to make an experiment.  It seems to me, though, that I must still keep working mainly at pure drawing, which is the foundation of all the rest. But as you saw in the latest, I’m gradually beginning to use wash.  As soon as I’m fully recovered I would like to make a more serious attempt at a particular watercolour on Harding, because that paper (more than Whatman) allows you to apply a solid basis or ground in black and white before starting to wash, without it taking away the look of watercolour. But at present I can’t work for long enough at a time on a piece, which is very frustrating because I long so much to work and to go outdoors. Meanwhile I’m glad that at least I can now do a little again.  I began this letter yesterday evening and I can now tell you that we, namely the woman and the two children and I, spent the night in the big attic. 
   That bedroom looks a lot like a ship’s hold because it’s all panelled, and I believe that to be very healthy. The cradle has to go downstairs during the day. It all went fine, and as long as there’s no unpleasantness from outside, which I have hopes there won’t be, we’ll get along quite well inside. As for me, I don’t find the company of the woman and the children odd, but feel precisely as if I’m more in my element and as if things had been like this for much longer. I’m quite used to rolling up my sleeves to do things that the woman is too weak for, such as making the bed or a thousand other chores. I’ve faced all manner of tasks like that, either for myself or often enough for the sick &c. And that those things aren’t an impediment to the work of painting and drawing is amply proved by the old Dutch paintings and drawings. It can do no harm to have the studio and family blending together, especially as regards figure drawing. I remember studio interiors by Ostade, small pen drawings, probably bits of his own house, which make it clear enough that Ostade’s studio probably bore little resemblance to those studios where there are oriental arms and vases and Persian carpets &c. To continue on the subject of art, I sometimes feel a great desire to get back to painting. The studio is now more spacious, the light better, I have a good cupboard for keeping paint &c. without creating too much mess and dirt. Also, I’ve already straightaway started working with watercolour again. It depends on my recovery, but as soon as I no longer run the risk of collapsing and can go outdoors for long periods and sit quietly in the open, I plan to take all that up again and put all my energy into it. I believe that now that Sien and I are living together and are no longer two separate households, as it were, I’ll be able to save more for painting materials from 150 francs a month than before. Neither Sien nor I mind making do, and as long as I don’t earn more myself by selling drawings we won’t buy much more in the way of furniture or household items, for example. For she and I would both much rather wait for those sorts of things than take more money now, even if we could get it. 
   For her part, Sien will start posing again seriously as soon as she has recovered, and I assure you her figure is interesting enough. In fact, you can see for yourself in Sorrow, for example, and a few of the others you have, that she knows how to approach posing and is suited to it. I have several nude studies11 that you haven’t seen yet. I also definitely want to continue with them as soon as she’s ready, because one learns a great deal from that. Even if I have to give up working out of doors for a considerable time if my health deteriorates (which I hope won’t happen), at any rate now I’ll have enough material indoors to occupy myself.  I’ve had a friendly letter from Pa and Ma. Just imagine, again with two money orders enclosed, even. They mustn’t do that any more, though. I know they need it themselves, and I say again that we can manage with the money from you now that things are turning out so well as regards the improvement in Sien’s condition, and mine too.  So I really would rather not have the money from Pa and Ma. As I wrote to you, as soon as I can save the money and the woman is better I even wanted to send some to Pa to pay for a journey here so that we can discuss this and that. What pleases me more than the money orders is that they’re in what seems to me the best mood in the circumstances, so that when I speak to them about Sien they won’t, I hope, immediately be against it but respond with good will.  I recently saw the exhibition of French art (on the Boschkant) from the collections of Mesdag, Post &c. There are many beautiful things there by Dupré, Corot, Daubigny, Diaz, Courbet, Breton, Jacque &c. I especially liked the large sketch by T. Rousseau from the Mesdag collection, a drove of cattle in the Alps.
   And a landscape by Courbet:14 yellow hilly, sandy ground, with fresh young grass growing here and there, with black brushwood fences against which a few white birch trunks stand out, grey buildings in the distance with red and blue slate roofs. And a narrow, small, light delicate grey band of sky above. The horizon very high, however, so that the ground is the main thing, and the delicate little band of sky really serves more as contrast to bring out the rough texture of the masses of dark earth.  I think this is the most beautiful work by Courbet that I’ve seen so far.  The Duprés are superb, and there’s a Daubigny, big thatched roofs against the slope of a hill, that I couldn’t get enough of. The same goes for a small Corot, a stretch of water and the edge of a wood on a summer morning about 4 o’clock. A single small pink cloud indicates that the sun will come up in a while. A stillness and calm and peace that enchants one.  I’m glad to have seen all this. Well, I’m going to close. I hope that you’ll write soon and above all that you really will come to Holland towards August. I’m writing to you ‘in between jobs’ because, as you can imagine, there’s a lot to be done now. I let Sien potter about but I always have to keep an eye on what she’s doing so that I can chance to be at hand if she needs help. For she really is very weak still (so much so that the professor, she told me, said ‘damned’ weak), and yet it’s good that in doing this and that she has a distraction. Anything that cheers her up and makes her light-hearted is medicine for her. The baby, too, is far from out of danger — you know how the child was delivered — that always has an effect on the child, and little can be said as to how it will turn out for another 6 weeks. Much depends on the milk, of course. I hope you’re not too bored reading all this, I wanted to write a brief word and it has turned into a long letter. I’m not yet running short, but if you could send something around the twentieth that would be helpful for the last days of the month. Adieu, with a hearty handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent Tuesday morning. My dear Theo, This time I have something to tell you about a visit from Mr Tersteeg. He came here this morning — and saw Sien and the children. I would have wished that he could at least have put on a friendly face for a young mother who gave birth a fortnight ago, but apparently that was asking too much. My dear Theo, he spoke to me in a way you can perhaps understand: What was the meaning of this woman and that child? Where on earth did I get the idea of living with a woman, and with children as well?  Wasn’t it as ridiculous as if I were to drive about the city in my own carriage? To which I replied that it was most definitely a different matter entirely. Was I not right in the head? It was obviously the product of a sick mind and body.  I told him that I’d just received ample reassurances from people much better qualified than he, namely the doctors at the hospital, as regards both my body and my mental strength being capable of making a sustained effort. 
   He kept chopping and changing from one subject to another, dragging in my Father and, just imagine, my uncle in Princenhage!!!1 Would get involved. Would write.  My dear Theo, for the woman’s sake, for my own sake, I restrained myself, I didn’t get angry. I gave curt and plain answers to his in my view all too indiscreet questions, perhaps too gently, but I preferred to resort to too gently rather than perhaps getting angry. He gradually calmed down a little. I asked him if it wouldn’t seem rather ridiculous if at home they received an outraged letter from him followed by a friendly invitation from me to come here at my expense to discuss the very same matter. This had some effect in that he looked surprised. Was I going to write? Do you question that?, I said, of course – but now you must admit that this is hardly a suitable moment, just when they’re in the middle of moving at home2 and the woman is in such a state that the least emotion could cause a prolapse of the womb that might never be put right. Making her feel fearful, anxious and nervous now is murder. 
   Oh in that case, of course, he wouldn’t write, and then again saying that I was as foolish as someone who wanted to jump into the water and he was trying to hold me back. I said that I didn’t doubt his good intentions, and that for that reason I tried not to be angered by his words, even though I found such a conversation most disagreeable. And finally, because I clearly showed that I wanted to end the conversation, he left. I’m writing to you immediately. I told him that I wrote to you about it, no more than that. This also calmed him somewhat.  You know that I don’t want to hide it, but for Sien, for the baby, and for me too, it would be better if there were no more scenes like this. Causing the woman to become agitated is to give her a hard blow. I can’t say this often enough. She is well, but weak and highly sensitive. The slightest thing can spoil her milk and lead to far worse, at least in the first six weeks.  I tried to turn the conversation to the drawings, but he just looked around quickly – Oh, those are the old ones. There were some new ones but he didn’t seem to see them. As you know, most of the recent ones are either with you, or C.M. still has them &c. He was overhasty in everything.  Only one thing is clear: I am as mad and wrong as can be. I ask you, how is it possible to speak to someone like that, and what good can it do? 
   This is exactly what I fear: an unsympathetic, schoolmasterly, unfeeling and indiscreet meddling in my most intimate and private affairs. No one could remain calm in the face of that. So although I didn’t get angry, I do severely blame Mr Tersteeg, and I don’t want to have anything to do with him or speak to him as long as he’s in this police officer mood. I’m writing to you about it immediately. I believe he’s capable of causing all sorts of misery with his untimely meddling at home and by sowing unrest in Princenhage (and Princenhage has nothing, absolutely nothing to do with it), and upsetting everyone. Can’t this be stopped??? Things are all right with home at the moment, but, you’ll see, who knows whether he won’t ruin it all again.  I intend writing myself as soon as possible, but it’s so rotten of Tersteeg to be such a troublemaker. And to whom? — a poor, weak woman who gave birth a fortnight ago.  No, it’s an ugly business, but he doesn’t feel that. With him it’s always and forever the same old thing, money. He has no other God, it seems. For my part I feel that one should be kind and gentle to women, children and the weak, and I have a sort of respect and emotion for them. 
   He had another gibe — I would make the woman unhappy, &c. I said that he wasn’t in a position to judge that now, and I asked him not to say such a thing again. Sien loves me and I love Sien. We want to and can live together, the two of us, on what I would otherwise have on my own — we can scrimp and scrape in every way and as much as possible. You know well enough how I’ve talked about this before. I can’t repeat too often, brother, how my whole future depends on this. A person can get over it once if he is crippled and wounded in love and in his affairs and plans. But that mustn’t happen too often. And now I have recovered or am in the process of recovering in body and soul, and Sien too, but it could be fatal if we were again hammered into the ground, so to speak. So give this some thought and, if you’re able to do anything, try to prevent Tersteeg or others from working against me too much. I can’t yet defend myself as I could if I were back to normal. I must become immersed in my work again, carefully, very carefully, but I 
   really can’t yet bear visits like the one this morning.  You at least know more about the matter than Tersteeg, but you still know Sien too little to know how much we love each other and how well we get on together.  If Tersteeg had his way, and others too, they’d of course tear Sien and me apart.  That’s what he’s after, and they wouldn’t shrink from using force.  It depends on whether we have the monthly sum from you to allow us to stay together.  For my part, I shall refuse the monthly sum from you as soon as you adopt the same point of view as Tersteeg. I don’t want to leave Sien in the lurch. If I don’t have her I’ll be broken, and then I would also be broken in my work and everything else. Then I would never get over that and, not wishing to be a burden or expense to you any longer, would only say to you: Theo, I’m a broken man and everything is shattered into pieces, there’s no use in your helping me any more. 
   Staying with the woman, I’m in good spirits, and then I say: the monthly sum from you will make a capable painter of me. With Sien, I can make the effort and put all my strength into work, but without her I give up. So that’s the way it is. You have so often shown that you understand me better and treat me infinitely better than others. I hope that this will continue to be the case now. There really is a sympathy between you and me in many things, and it seems to me, Theo, that all your trouble and all my trouble won’t be in vain. You have always gone on helping me, and I’ve always gone on working and now feel new powers developing as I get better. You see, what exists between you and me is, I believe, more serious than that lecture from Tersteeg, and can’t be spoiled by his meddling or that of others. Yet for the sake of peace and good order we must calmly put an end to this meddling. Just excuse me for being rather upset. For the woman and me it was the first awful hour since we came out of hospital. 
   If you agree, we’ll take no further notice of it, however, and not let ourselves be upset. But write to us soon, for I’m in great need of a letter from you. I don’t want my head to be full of worry and care, since my getting better depends on keeping calm.  Otherwise I’m getting on well; the woman and the child are so sweet, so good and quiet that one can’t help cheering up. But Sien changed on the spot when she heard Tersteeg speak — and so did I.  I’ve seen the doctor3 again, and again have something to take, just to hasten my recovery if possible. Passing water continues to go well, thank God. Nearly normal for several days. And I’m growing stronger; the chronic fever is getting less.  Now, because of Tersteeg, I want to write to Pa and Ma a little sooner, although I believe later would be preferable. I’ll write as soon as you’ve sent something around the twentieth, although I would rather have waited until they’d finished moving and the woman was stronger. And even now I think it would be much, much better to wait till then, except that Tersteeg might beat me to it. Enclosing the money for the journey for Pa is a sign of my feelings, I believe, and a courtesy from which they’ll understand, I hope, that I appreciate them. 
   So write soon, and if one thing or another proves to be a reason, brother, for us to become more attached and understand and trust each other more, instead of letting us be driven apart through the meddling of Tersteeg or anyone else, then I don’t regret this morning’s unpleasantness. Let me repeat, I make no claim to keep up a social position or to live well. The bare essentials for the woman are the only expenses she brings with her, and they must be met not by receiving more but by making do ourselves. Because of the love between us, this making do is a joy, so to speak, rather than a burden for her and me. The sense of getting better sets her and me aglow, the desire to be back at work in a very short time and to be entirely absorbed in it.  She’s a very, very sweet mother, so simple, so touching — once you know her. But there was a nasty expression of pain or I don’t know what in her when she heard Tersteeg talking to me and caught a few words. It may be that Tersteeg was like that because he was taken by surprise — still I can’t consider it nice or entirely excuse it. 
 0  Whatever he may be for others — even now I’m willing to believe that he’s actually better — for me he is insufferable. If Tersteeg had his way, I would be miserable and a lost man. I believe he would very cold-bloodedly watch Sien drown or something, and then claim it was beneficial for civilized society.  As long as I can drown with her, I don’t much care. But we felt sufficiently that her life and my life were one when we saw each other again beside the baby’s cradle in the hospital.  Hallo, brother! But I mustn’t lapse into things like that. It’s healthier to continue thinking calmly about working and getting better, and living quietly day by day.  Sien and I have an agreement, however, in the extreme event that force is used against us. This is that if we can’t live together, at least we can emigrate together. It’s 10 to one that that means certain death if one has no money and isn’t strong, but we’d prefer that to being parted.  There is love between her and me, and promises of mutual loyalty between her and me.  There may be no tampering with this, Theo, for it’s the holiest thing there is in life.  Her wish and mine is that matters shouldn’t take a dramatic 
 1  turn. We’re too full of new zest for life, too full of a desire to work and to plough on, for us not to want to do everything to avoid extremes.  Yet if there were many people — especially you — who felt towards us as Tersteeg does, we couldn’t hold out, and the end would inevitably be tragic. If things stay quiet, we’ll fight our fight here by working, and that may be just everyday and ordinary but it isn’t easy either, and courage and energy are needed to set about it vigorously and keep it up. We came through the whole winter, and with God’s help we’ll get a little further.  I say with God’s help, because I’m grateful to God as well as to you for the help I’ve received and still receive from you.  Tersteeg is an energetic man, but I hope he won’t devote his energy to persecuting Sien and me or anything. Perhaps he’ll realize that he isn’t obliged to interfere, and quietly stay out of it. He doesn’t care about me — I’m really a matter of complete indifference to him — he does it because he thinks he will please or be of service to Uncle Cent or Pa. He doesn’t spare or take the slightest account of my interests or feelings. He comes in here, takes in the woman breast-feeding the baby with a look that makes her cringe, and without one kind word to her (which you would expect for a mother, even if one doesn’t know her) he says to me 
 2  ‘Is that your model or is it something else?’ You see, that’s neither humane nor tactful.  I may not always be polite to men, but I watch my manners in front of a weak woman. He says nothing about drawings, about the studio, &c. No, but he does talk about my uncle in Princenhage, about whom I care nothing, whom I have nothing to do with. And about my father — immediately taking it for granted a priori that I’m on bad terms with him, whereas in fact relations have long been improving. Enough now. But write soon, old chap, for I assure you a warm-hearted letter from you helps me more than my pills, &c. As for my constitution — Tersteeg isn’t my doctor and doesn’t understand my constitution in the slightest — if I need information about that I’ll ask my own doctor, but I never wish to discuss the subject with him again. But there’s no doubt at all that few things can do either the woman or me more harm than visits like the one we’ve just had. Avoiding them is definitely one of the first rules I must observe. Never has a doctor told me I was in any way abnormal in the tone and the sense in which Tersteeg dared to say it to me this morning. That I couldn’t think or that I wasn’t right in the head. Never in the past, or now, has a doctor said that. I have a nervous constitution, but there’s absolutely no harm in that. With Tersteeg these things become serious insults. The same as with Pa when he wanted to send me to Geel, but more so. I may not let that kind of thing go unchallenged. I long to talk to you about my illness and how that happened and so on. If Tersteeg were to persist in his rash efforts, he would sow a great deal of unrest, that I know for sure. Well, adieu old chap — you know, Sien, when she’s calm, has become so quiet, so fine, so touching a mother, like an etching or drawing or painting by Feyen-Perrin. I long for drawing, for posing, for her and me to be completely better — for order and tranquillity and some sympathy from you above all. Regards from Sien and a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I cannot deplore Tersteeg’s untimely visit enough. It prompts me to discuss a few things before you come which I would rather have dealt with while you were here. I’ve told you that I want to marry Sien, and as soon as possible — note, though, that I especially wanted to discuss this matter with you in person and before I said anything to Pa. I get on better with you, you sense things more correctly than all the others put together, and if you say something it’s useful to me. Even if we disagree about this or that, there’s always a middle way to be found between you and me, because we speak with sympathy and calmness. I also believe that if no one else interfered unasked, agreement could be reached in every respect. However, the minute that the issue of marriage is raised, people instantly fly into a temper and there’s an infernal outcry, and you can no longer reason with them or get a word in edgeways.  I shan’t wait any longer to write about something I would rather have discussed face to face. On the subject of marriage you said, don’t marry her, &c., and you thought that Sien was making a fool of me, &c. 
   I wrote to you about a few thing at the time, saying that I didn’t agree with you, &c. But I didn’t want to argue with you as strongly as I felt, because I believed and still believe that in time you’ll come to care a great deal for Sien as you get to know her, and then, of course, will no longer imagine that she’s deceiving me or something like that. Once we’d got that far, I thought, we could talk about marriage again. But you will remember that in my later letters I didn’t speak of that so directly any more.  But I did say at that time there is a promise of marriage between her and me, and I don’t want you to think that I regard her as a kept woman or as someone with whom I’m having an affair with no further consequences. Now I return to this point: that promise of marriage given by her to me, by me to her, sincerely and honestly on both sides, is sacred to me, and will remain more sacred to me than anything else. This promise of marriage is twofold, namely a promise of civil marriage — as soon as circumstances permit – but secondly it’s a promise henceforth to help each other in the meantime, to support and cherish each other as if we were already married. In short, to share everything, 
   to live entirely for each other, and not to let ourselves be separated by anything.  For the family the most important question is probably civil marriage. That’s important to her and me, but all the same secondary to the essence of the matter, the love and loyalty between her and me as it already exists and daily grows.  I want to propose that we let the whole subject of civil marriage rest for a while and, for example, postpone speaking about it until such time as I earn around 150 francs a month by selling my work, so that help from you is no longer required. Thus with YOU, but with you alone, I want to agree that for the time being I won’t marry her — in a civil marriage — until the drawing business is going so well that I’m independent. As soon as I begin to earn, you will gradually send less, and eventually, when you can stop sending money altogether, we’ll return to the question of civil marriage.  But now, as to the meantime — it would be quite absurd after this entire winter, and above all after everything that has happened in recent months, to want to detach or part me from her. We are chained and tied to each other by a strong bond of sincere affection.  And through the help we give each other. For, if I may put it this way, she’s my associate in the work and more, infinitely more than an ordinary model, because she’s so willing and intelligent in posing that I can’t praise her too much.  So for the present we must combat the difficulties as calmly as possible day by day, and I hope that you’ll view things with greater peace of mind after what I’ve told you now. In the winter, for example, you heard better things about me from Heyerdahl than, for example, Tersteeg’s opinion of my work. I now feel so much new pleasure in work that I have every hope of making good progress again this autumn. Perhaps towards Christmas, thus when the year in question is up, I’ll send you small watercolours, which had their beginnings in the last small drawings that already had some brown and red and grey in them. And sometimes I feel a strong desire to paint as well, a very strong desire and ambition. Especially now that the better light and the better studio automatically put the idea in my mind.  The doctor5 won’t yet let me do as I would wish — I still tire very quickly, but that will pass and then... we can set to work full of energy.  I just hope, Theo, that what I’ve said about marriage will make you see that I don’t demand to have my own way in everything, that I’ll go along with what you think as far as I can, but see this also as proof that I deserve to have your trust and to have you write to me about various things. I can’t get on with the others, and with you I can talk and reach a compromise.  What I want is to preserve the lives6 of Sien and her two children. I don’t want her to sink back into that terrible state of illness and misery in which I found her and from which she has been rescued for the time being. I undertook that and I must persist with it. I don’t want her to feel abandoned and alone for a moment longer, I want her to realize and to see in everything that I feel a tender love for her and hold her children dear.  And that — no matter who thinks it wrong — you will understand and not try to stop me. I accordingly give you the credit for her recovery, in that I attribute only a small part to myself. I was merely the means.  Now I reserve the right to raise the subjects of marriage in general, the cost of running a home and so on when you come, especially because I believe there are points you’re mistaken about, but that’s entirely in a spirit of friendship and has no direct relation to civil marriage to Sien. Since one thing and another force me to write about that straightaway, I ask only that this matter be allowed to rest until such time as I earn more through selling my work straightaway. When you come I’ll tell you the reasons why I would much prefer to marry straightaway, but you mustn’t see that as further insistence on my part. No, I’m ready to concede as much as I’ve said of my own accord and voluntarily.   If you’re asked about the matter, I believe you can say that there’s enough trust between you and me for you to get full information from me, but that you don’t consider it necessary to discuss the matter for the time being. Conversations like the one with Tersteeg put the woman and me further back than the cruellest north wind. They must be avoided. What comes first is full recovery and being able to start regular work again.  I repeat. I regret I haven’t been able to say to you face to face — in your presence and after you had got to know the woman better — what I say now by letter. Then I might have been able to say more to make you see that I’m not being unreasonable. But even so, I hope you won’t stay away long, and will write soon in any case.  Rest assured, the woman will soon be at ease with you. You, after all, won’t observe her and look down on her the way H.G.T. did yesterday.  Rest assured of her and my warmest affection, and accept in thought a handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent What I’ll also discuss with you sometime is the state in which I found her and things from her past. The poor creature has suffered appallingly. And yet there’s still a zest for life and sensitivity in her that hasn’t been extinguished.  I also repeat that I long for you so much, isolated from everything and everyone else, because I need sympathy and warmth. I would so much like to take a walk with you — even though the Rijswijk mill isn’t there any more. Oh well.  Dear Brother, It’s already late, but I wanted to write to you again. You aren’t here, yet I’m in need of you, and it seems to me as if we aren’t far apart sometimes.  Today I made an agreement with myself, which was to regard my illness, or rather what’s left of it, as non-existent. Enough time has been lost, the work must be carried on.  So, well or not well, I’m going to draw again regularly from morning till evening. I don’t want anyone else to be able to say, ‘Oh, those are only old drawings.’1  I’ve drawn a study of the cradle today with touches of colour in it.  I’m also working on a ditto like the meadows I recently sent you.  My hands have become rather whiter than I care for, but what can I do about it? I’ll also go outdoors again. It matters less to me that it may strike me down than that I’m kept longer from my work. Art is jealous; she won’t allow illness to be placed above her. So I’ll let her have her way. I hope, therefore, that you’ll soon have a few reasonable ones.  People like me aren’t really allowed to be ill. You must really understand how I regard art. One must work long and hard to arrive at the truthful. What I want and set as my goal is damned difficult, and yet I don’t believe I’m aiming too high. I want to make drawings that move some people. Sorrow5 is a small beginning — perhaps small landscapes like the Laan van Meerdervoort, the Rijswijk meadows7 and the Fish-drying barn8 are also small beginnings. At least they contain something straight from my own feelings. 
   Whether in figures or in landscapes, I would like to express not something sentimentally melancholic but deep sorrow.  In short, I want to reach the point where people say of my work, that man feels deeply and that man feels subtly. Despite my so-called coarseness — you understand — perhaps precisely because of it. It seems pretentious to talk like this now, but that’s why I want to push on. What am I in the eyes of most people? A nonentity or an oddity or a disagreeable person — someone who has and will have no position in society, in short a little lower than the lowest. Very well — assuming that everything is indeed like that, then through my work I’d like to show what there is in the heart of such an oddity, such a nobody.  This is my ambition, which is based less on resentment than on love in spite of everything, based more on a feeling of serenity than on passion.  Even though I’m often in a mess, inside me there’s still a calm, pure harmony and music. In the poorest little house, in the filthiest corner, I see paintings or drawings. And my mind turns in that direction as if with an irresistible urge. 
   As time passes, other things are increasingly excluded, and the more they are the faster my eyes see the picturesque. Art demands persistent work, work in spite of everything, and unceasing observation.  By persistent I mean in the first place continued labour, but also not abandoning your approach because of what someone else says. I have hopes, brother, that in a few years, and even now already, you’ll gradually see things by me that will give you some recompense for your sacrifices.  I’ve had very little conversation with painters lately. I felt none the worse for that. It isn’t the language of painters one ought to listen to but the language of nature. I can now understand, better than six months ago or more, why Mauve said: don’t talk to me about Dupré, talk to me instead about the side of that ditch, or something like that. It sounds crude and yet it’s perfectly correct. Feeling things themselves, reality, is more important than feeling paintings, at least more productive and life-giving.  Because I now have such a broad, such a large sense of art and of life itself, of which art is the essence, it sounds to me so shrill and false when there are people like Tersteeg who are always on the hunt.
   For my part I find a peculiar charm in many modern paintings that the old ones don’t have. For me one of the highest and noblest expressions of art is always that of the English, for instance Millais and Herkomer and Frank Holl. What I mean to say as regards the difference between old and contemporary art is: perhaps the new artists are deeper thinkers. There’s another great difference: in sentiment, between Chill October by Millais11 and the Overveen bleaching grounds by Ruisdael, for example. And equally between the Irish emigrants by Holl13 and the women reading the Bible by Rembrandt. Rembrandt and Ruisdael are sublime, for us as much as for their contemporaries, but there’s something in the moderns that strikes us as more personally intimate.  That’s how it is with the woodcuts by Swain, and those by the old German masters too. So it was a mistake a few years ago when there was a vogue among the moderns for imitating the old masters.  This is why I think what père Millet says is so right: I think it absurd that people want to appear to be something other than they are. That seems to be an unremarkable observation and yet it’s as unfathomably deep as the ocean, and I for one think it advisable to take it to heart in all things.  I just wanted to tell you that regular work will and must be resumed, come what may — and I want to add that I’m longing so much for a letter from you, and also to wish you good-night. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Please remember the thick Ingres if you can, a sample is enclosed. I still have enough of the thin. I can wash in watercolour on the thick Ingres; on the sans fin, for example, it always gets muddy without it being entirely my fault. I’ll draw the cradle, I hope, a hundred times apart from the one today. With persistence.  Sunday morning My dear Theo, I received your letter and the 50-franc note enclosed. I thank you right heartily for both, and I’m delighted that you gave me some details about your visit. Do you think we could agree that while you’re here we’ll spend the time together that’s left after your business and visits and then do our best, on both sides, to be in the same sort of mood as in the past at the Rijswijk mill? As for me, old chap — although the mill has gone2 and with it the years and my past youth, just as irrevocably — what has reawakened deep inside me is the belief that there’s something good and that it’s worthwhile making an effort and doing one’s best to take life seriously. This is now perhaps, or rather certainly, more firmly rooted in me than in the past, when I had experienced less. For me the point now is to express the poetry of those days in drawings.  Your letter to me crossed mine, in which I told you I’d decided to carry on working regularly, well or not well.  Well, that’s what I’ve done and I feel fine, though I have to take more to keep it up. But the work itself makes me much more clear-headed, of course — towards the end I couldn’t bear not being able to draw. I’ll have a couple of watercolours for you when you come, brother. By Jove, the studio works so nicely. You remember, last winter I said: in a year you’ll have watercolours. These ones are simply intended to show you that if I work at drawing, the correctness of perspective and proportion, it also benefits the watercolouring. 
   And for myself I did them to test whether now, after doing nothing but drawing for a time (around six months), I found watercolours easier, and secondly to see where I still need to do more work on the foundation or basic drawing on which everything depends.  They’re landscapes, very difficult in their delineation, with complicated perspective — but precisely because of that there’s a true Dutch character and sentiment to them. They look like the last ones I sent, and are no less conscientiously delineated, only now there’s also: colour — the gentle green of the meadow contrasting with the red tiled roof, the light in the sky set off by the matt tones of the foreground, a yard with earth and damp wood. In judging me and my behaviour, Tersteeg always starts from the premise that I’m incapable of anything and am good for nothing. He told me that himself... ‘Oh, it will be the same with that painting of yours as with all the other things you’ve started — it won’t come to anything.’  That’s how he talked last winter, that’s how he talks now — whereupon I told him that it would please me not to visit him or see him here for the next six months. Since that sort of talk only impedes and upsets me.  You must understand this, as a result I couldn’t care less about him and I’m quite content for him finally to understand now, clearly and plainly, that I’ve taken a thorough dislike to him in recent months, and would rather not have anything to do with him.  I carry on working quietly, and he can say, to his heart’s content, all the absurd things about me that pop into his head. As long as he doesn’t impede me in my work, I’ll forget all about him. 
   It was different when he said last winter that he would intervene to see that I didn’t get any more money from you. Then I immediately wrote to you about it.  But I won’t write to you about him any more until something similar happens again. I would think myself foolish if I were to chase after him and say: Mr T, Mr T, I’m a true painter like other painters, despite all your arguments. No, it seems to me more self-restrained, precisely because it (the artistic) is in fact in my very marrow, to go on bivouacking with my things in meadows or dunes very calmly, or to work in the studio with a model without taking the slightest notice of him.  But what I find rather pleasing is that you too have read Le ventre de Paris8 recently. I’ve also read Nana. Listen, Zola is actually Balzac II.  Balzac I portrays the society of 1815-1848, Zola begins where Balzac leaves off and goes on to Sedan11 or rather to the present day.  I think it’s absolutely superb. Now I must ask you what you think of Mme François, who picks up poor Florent as he lies unconscious in the middle of the road where the vegetable carts are passing, and lets him ride with her. Although the other vegetable sellers shout: ‘Leave him lying there, the drunk! We’ve no time to pick up men lying in the gutter,’ &c. The figure of Mme François stands against the background of the Halles throughout the book, contrasting with the brutal egoism of the other women, so calm and so dignified and so sympathetic. You see, Theo, I believe Mme François’ act showed true humanity, and in relation to Sien I have done and will continue to do what I believe someone like Mme François would have done for Florent if he hadn’t cared more about politics than about her. So there you have it, and that humanity is the salt of life, without that I wouldn’t care about life. Enough. 
   I care as little about what Tersteeg says as Mme François cared about what the other vegetable sellers and women shouted: leave him alone — we’ve no time. In short, the whole commotion and racket. Besides, it won’t be long before Sien is supporting herself entirely through posing. She posed for my very best drawing, Sorrow, at least I think it’s the best thing I’ve done, and in less than a year there’ll be regular drawings of figures as well, that I promise you. For make no mistake — much as I love landscape, I love figures even more. Still, it’s the hardest part, and of course takes me a great deal of study and work, and time too. But don’t let them fool you into thinking that she’s keeping me from the work; you’ll see for yourself in the studio. If it were so that I was working less because of her, I would agree with you, but now the absolute opposite is true, really. Well, we’ll gradually reach agreement on that, I hope, not so much through words as through drawings. I’m coming to hate words — but anyway. But I’m so delighted you’re coming, old chap. Shall we actually go into the meadows again together? — with nothing before us except that still, gentle, delicate green and such a light sky. Excellent! And the sea! And the beach! And the OLD out-of-the-way Scheveningen. Marvellous. By the way, recently I’ve been seeing some very beautiful small charcoal drawings15 by T. de Bock, mostly touched up with white and delicate blue in the sky — very good and more to my liking than his paintings.  I can’t tell you how much I enjoy the space in the studio — I immediately notice the effect on me now that I’m working again. We’ll teach them to say of my drawings: ‘they’re only old ones’. I wasn’t ill for the fun of it. 
   So you must imagine me sitting at my attic window as early as 4 o’clock, studying the meadows and the carpenter’s yard with my perspective frame — as the fires are lit in the court to make coffee, and the first worker ambles into the yard. Over the red tiled roofs comes a flock of white pigeons flying between the black smoking chimneys. But behind this an infinity of delicate, gentle green, miles and miles of flat meadow, and a grey sky as still, as peaceful as Corot or Van Goyen.  That view over the ridges of the roofs and the gutters in which the grass grows, very early in the morning and the first signs of life and awakening — the bird on the wing, the chimney smoking, the figure far below ambling along — this is the subject of my watercolour. I hope you’ll like it.  Whether I succeed in the future depends, I believe, more on my work than on anything else. Provided I can stay on my feet, well I’ll fight my fight quietly in this way and no other, that is by calmly looking through my little window at the things in nature, and drawing them faithfully and lovingly.  For the rest only adopting a defensive posture if attacked, but otherwise drawing is too dear to me for me to allow anything to distract from it.  The singular effects of perspective are more intriguing to me than human intrigues. If Tersteeg had better understood that my painting is an entirely different matter from other things, he wouldn’t make such a fuss. But now, in his eyes, I’ve deceived and disappointed Mauve. Moreover, he thinks I only do it on account of the money from you. I find it all absurd — too absurd to attach any importance to it. Mauve himself will realize later that he wasn’t deceived in me and that I was absolutely not unwilling. It’s just that he HIMSELF persuaded me to draw more conscientiously long before I did anything else. But back then we didn’t understand each other correctly, again because of H.G.T., who was behind it.
   As to your letter, I would like to say again that I can’t help it that you didn’t know about Sien’s child, because when I told you about her I certainly mentioned it, but you probably thought I meant the child that hadn’t yet come into the world. But I had already spoken a few words about the humanity sometimes found in a person, as in Mme François in the book by Zola. But I have no humanitarian plans or ideas, as if I thought I could do the same for everyone. Yet I’m not ashamed to say (though I know very well that the word humanity is out of favour) that for my part I’ve always felt the need to love one creature or another, and will continue to do so. Preferably an unfortunate or spurned or abandoned creature, I don’t know why. Once I nursed a poor burnt miner for six weeks or 2 months20 — I shared my food with an old man a whole winter long — and I don’t know what else, and now Sien. But to this day I don’t believe that this was foolish or bad, I see it as so natural and self-evident that I can’t understand how people can be so indifferent to each other normally. Let me add that if I did wrong, you also did wrong in helping me so loyally — that would be wrong too, but that would surely be absurd. I’ve always believed that ‘love thy neighbour as thyself’21 isn’t an exaggeration but the normal state of affairs. But anyway. And you know that I’ll make the greatest possible effort to ensure that I start selling soon, precisely to avoid abusing your goodness.   I also firmly believe, brother, that if, in response to suggestions that you should stop sending me the money — which I think may possibly be made, you calmly reply that you’re confident I’ll turn out to be a good painter and that you’ll therefore continue to support me. That you’ve left me free as regards my private life and affairs, and won’t coerce or help to coerce me, and then there will very soon be a stop to the gossip, and then only in certain circles will I be seen as a social pariah and be cast out. Which leaves me pretty indifferent, and to which I’m already accustomed. Which will make me concentrate on art more and more. And though some may damn me irrevocably and for all time, in the nature of things my profession and my work will open up new connections, all the fresher for not being made cold, stiff and sterile by old prejudices about my past. Connections with people like Tersteeg, who persist in their prejudices, are absolutely sterile and useless. Well, old chap, thank you for your letter and the fifty francs — my drawing has dried somewhat in the meantime and I’m going to touch it up. The lines of the roofs and gutters now shoot away nicely like arrows from a bow — drawn without hesitation. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent P.S. Read lots of Zola, it’s healthy stuff and clears the mind.  Wednesday morning My dear Theo, It matters greatly to me that you shouldn’t get the idea that I’m in a dejected or abnormal mood. That’s why I wrote to you already about work in my last letter, and since I have a few more things to ask in that connection I haven’t waited long before writing again. By the time you come I’ll do my best to have several watercolours done in different ways ready for you to see, then we can discuss which seems best to you. So I’ll work regularly on this every day, and continue to do so until you come.  I now have 3 of Scheveningen1 — again the Fish-drying barn you know — drawn in as much detail — only now there’s colour as well. As you well know, Theo, it isn’t harder to work in colour than in black and white, the opposite perhaps, but as far as I can see 3/4 comes down to the original sketch, and almost the whole watercolour depends on its quality.  It isn’t enough to give an approximation, and my aim has been and still is to make it more intense. I believe that’s already evident in the black-and-white fish-drying barns, because there you can follow everything and see how it all fits together, and look, I think this is why I now work much more fluently in watercolour, because for such a long time I did my best to draw more correctly. 
   Tersteeg said that what I was doing was a waste of time; soon you’ll see that I’ve saved a great deal of time.  I already feel that, and you’ll see it for yourself when you come.  This evening I went from one shop to another searching for thick Ingres, but in vain. They have the thin, but the dense or double is nowhere to be found. At the time I bought all that Stam had left, and it was wonderfully mature. Before you come, oh do your best to find some once more. And if you can’t get any, try asking for ‘papier de la forme’. That is with a yellowish tint — stiff — and you can use wash on it. I believe it’s also much cheaper than Harding or Whatman, so that in the end there’s quite a saving.  When you come I know of a few lovely paths through the meadows where it’s so quiet and peaceful that you’ll be delighted. I’ve discovered old and new labourer’s cottages there, and other houses that are distinctive, with small gardens lining the banks of the ditch — really charming. I’m going to draw there early tomorrow morning. It’s a path through the meadows from Schenkweg to Enthoven’s factory or Het Zieke. I saw a dead pollard willow there, just the thing for Barye, for example. It hung over a pond with reeds, all alone and melancholy, and its bark was scaled and mossy, as it were, and spotted and marbled in various tones — something like the skin of a snake, greenish, yellowish, mostly dull black. With white flaking spots and stumpy branches. I’m going to attack it tomorrow morning.
   I’ve also done a bleaching ground at Scheveningen, on the spot in one go, entirely in wash almost without preparation, on a very coarse piece of torchon. Here are a couple of small sketches of it.  I’ll make sure that several things are ready by the time you come. I think you’ll like the Fish-drying barn now that it’s with colours.  Make no mistake, old chap, I’m fully back into my normal routine, and rest assured that everything else depends on work, and I see everything as directly related to that. The new studio makes a huge difference compared to the previous one in that it’s more pleasant to work in; for posing, especially, it’s a great improvement because one can stand further back. I’m sure it will be well worth the extra rent.  I have one request for you, though. I would entirely understand and would find it quite natural if, instead of sending the money on 1 August, you were to give it to me yourself when you arrive on, say, 7 August. As soon as I received your last letter, however, I made some purchases of paper and paint and brushes, and by 1 August I’ll certainly need some more things. So I want to ask you to be so kind as to send something all the same just before 1 August, if possible, even though you’ll be coming soon afterwards, because I’ve worked it out exactly, exactly, and after the first few days of August I’ll certainly be absolutely broke. I hope this won’t inconvenience you: of course, more is not the intention; it’s the time that matters, namely 1 August, if possible, and otherwise only a few days later. I also have a second of the Rijswijk meadows in which the same subject takes on an entirely different aspect through being seen from a different height and viewpoint. As you see, I’ve become very caught up in landscapes. The reason is that Sien can’t pose yet, but otherwise the figure must remain the chief concern. 
   When you come I’ll take care to be close to home as long as you’re in the city and that you know where I am, and otherwise I’ll carry on with my normal routine while you do your business and pay visits. I can find you wherever you suggest a meeting, but for various reasons I believe it’s better for both of us if I don’t go with you to the Plaats, say, or to Mauve, for example. I’m so used to my working clothes, in which I can sit or lie in the sand or grass as I please (for in the dunes, for example, I hardly ever use a chair, except perhaps an old fish basket), that my outfit is rather too Robinson Crusoe-like8 for me to accompany you much on your rounds.  I say this in advance so that you’ll know I won’t be an embarrassment to you, but otherwise you understand that I long for every half hour you can spare. I think we’ll be more at ease if we’re completely taken up by painting and drawing, and talk mainly about that. Unless you’re not bored or embarrassed by other matters, if not, then of course I have no secrets from you, and you have my complete confidence in everything.  I also long to show you the woodcuts. I have another splendid one, a drawing by Fildes, ‘Dickens’s empty chair’ from The Graphic of 70. I could have bought 3 etchings by Meryon for 2 guilders for all three, but I let them go. They were good though, but I have so few etchings and want to concentrate on woodcuts if I buy anything else. But I wanted to tell you about them — Blok12 has them, and I don’t know if all Meryons are rare and valuable. They’re from an old volume of L’Artiste. I’m still under the spell of Zola’s books. How painted those Halles are.  My health is good, though I still feel the odd thing and will probably continue to do so, at least for some time yet. Sien and the child are also well; they’re getting stronger and I love them dearly. I must have another go at the cradle (when it’s a rainy day and I can’t go outside), entirely in watercolour. But for the rest, when you come I want to show you — landscape watercolours — nearer winter I hope to have figure watercolours, that is, after I’ve been here a year. First I’ll have to draw more nudes and a lot more in black and white, it seems to me. We’ll discuss all that, and I don’t doubt that your visit will be a great help in keeping things in order and making work go smoothly. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
    
   By quietly carrying on with my work I have every hope I’ll gradually acquire a new circle of friends to make up for the loss of the friendliness of Mauve, HGT and others.  But I’ll take no steps to bring that about, none at all, for it must come through the work. What has happened to me with H.G.T. is nothing out of the ordinary; everyone experiences things like that in life. It’s impossible to say exactly what the cause is. But in the case of H.G.T. it’s an old grievance. I know now with near certainty that he said things about me long ago which did much to cast me in a bad light. However, I needn’t be concerned about that — what could hurt me in the past can’t do so now. When you come to the studio you’ll see for yourself how utterly absurd it is for him to say: oh, your drawing will never amount to anything. But it’s difficult to counter a pronouncement like that, because as soon as one does so it’s seen as conceit, and people cite the very greatest names and say: he thinks he’s so-and-so or so-and-so.
   But, again, anyone who works with love and with intelligence has a kind of armour against people’s opinion in the sincerity of his love for nature and art.  Nature is severe and hard, so to speak, but never deceives and always helps you to go forward.  So I don’t count it a misfortune if I find myself out of favour with HGT or anyone else, however much I regret it. That can’t be the direct cause of unhappiness — if I felt no love for nature and my work, then I would be unhappy. But the less I get on with people the more I learn to trust nature and to concentrate on it. All these things make me fresher and fresher inside — you’ll also see that I’m not afraid of a fresh green or a soft blue and the thousand different greys, for there’s hardly any colour that isn’t a grey: red-grey, yellow-grey, green-grey, blue-grey. This is what all colour mixing comes down to. When I went back to the Fish-drying barn, a luxuriant and indescribably fresh green from a wild vegetable or oilseed had shot up in the baskets filled with sand in the foreground that serve to stop the sand of the dunes blowing about. Two months ago it was all barren except for a bit of grass in the small garden, and now that rough, wild, luxuriantly sprouting green produced a most pleasant effect as a contrast to the bareness of the rest. I hope you’ll like that drawing. The vista — the view over the roofs of the village with the small church tower and the dunes — was so attractive. I can’t tell you with how much pleasure I drew it. So come soon — I believe you’ll be completely content with the change of studio when you see how infinitely better it is for my work — more space, better light, greater distance. 
    
   Yesterday evening I got a parcel from home. Among other things, it contained a sort of demi-saison16 which is very useful. It was very kind of them. And there were tobacco and cigars, a cake and underwear. In short, a whole package. Don’t you think that’s kind? It’s more that I’m pleased by it showing their warm feelings than by anything else.  I’ve also had another letter from Rappard. I take enormous pleasure in the fact that that chap is so fascinated by his English woodcuts. I got him going in the beginning, but now he needs no further encouragement; now he’s almost as enthusiastic as I am.
 0  When you come I’ll show you a few prints which, once seen, won’t lightly fade from memory. Among them there are things very different from the school of Boughton, say, although he’s certainly one of the leaders.  I mean things remarkable at once for their reality and their style, drawn like Albrecht Dürer but with lots of local colour and chiaroscuro. You don’t often see those prints any more these days; for you have to look for them in magazines of 10 or 15 years ago. For example, during the war of 70-71. My dear Theo, Just a word to say welcome before you come here. And to report the safe arrival of your letter and the enclosure, and to thank you very much.  It was most welcome for I’m working hard and again need one or two things.  As regards black in nature, we are of course in complete agreement, as I understand it. Absolute black doesn’t in fact occur. Like white, however, it’s present in almost every colour and forms the endless variety of greys — distinct in tone and strength. So that in nature one in fact sees nothing but these tones or strengths.  

The 3  
fundamental colours  
 are  
 red, yellow, blue,


,,    
composite
,,
orange, green, purple.


 From these are obtained the endless variations of grey by adding black and some white — red-grey, yellow-grey, blue-grey, green-grey, orange-grey, violet-grey.  It’s impossible to say how many different green-greys there are for example — the variation is infinite. But the whole chemistry of colours is no more complicated than those simple few fundamentals. And a good understanding of them is worth more than 70 different shades of paint — given that more than 70 tones and strengths can be made with the 3 primary colours and white and black. The colourist is he who on seeing a colour in nature is able to analyze it coolly and say, for example, that green-grey is yellow with black and almost no blue, &c. In short, knowing how to make up the greys of nature on the palette. 
   To make notes out of doors, however, or make a small scratch, a highly developed feeling for the outline is absolutely essential, as it is for working it up later.  This doesn’t come of its own accord, but firstly through observation, and then above all through persistent hard work and seeking. Some study of anatomy and perspective is also required.  Hanging beside me is a landscape study by Roelofs, a pen sketch, but I can’t tell you how expressive that simple outline is. Everything is in there. Another, even more telling example is the large Shepherdess woodcut by Millet which you showed me last year, and which has remained in my memory. Also, for example, the pen sketches by Ostade and Peasant Bruegel.  When I see such results, I feel the cardinal importance of the outline most clearly. And you know from Sorrow, for example, that I take great trouble to make myself better in that respect.  But you’ll see when you come to the studio that besides seeking the outline I certainly also have a feeling, like anyone else, for the strengths.  And that I also have nothing against making watercolours — but they’re founded on drawing first, and then from the drawing springs 
   not only the watercolour but all kinds of other shoots that will develop in due course in me as in anyone else working with love.  I’ve attacked that old giant of a pollard willow, and I believe it has turned out the best of the watercolours. A sombre landscape — that dead tree beside a stagnant pond covered in duckweed, in the distance a Rijnspoor depot where railway lines cross, smoke-blackened buildings — also green meadows, a cinder road and a sky in which the clouds are racing, grey with an occasional gleaming white edge, and a depth of blue where the clouds tear apart for a moment.  In short, I wanted to make it like how I imagine the signalman with his smock and red flag must see and feel it when he thinks: how gloomy it is today. I get a lot of pleasure out of work these days, though now and again I still clearly feel the after-effects of my illness.  As to the drawings I’m going to show you now, I think only this: that they will, I hope, serve as evidence that I’m not stuck on one level but am moving in a direction that is reasonable. As for the commercial value of my work, I have no pretensions other than that I would be very surprised if in time my work doesn’t sell as well as that of others. Whether that happens now or later, well, I’m not bothered about that too much. Just working faithfully from nature and with persistence seems to me a sure way, and one that can’t end up with nothing. 
   The feeling for and love of nature always strike a chord sooner or later with people who take an interest in art. The duty of the painter is to study nature in depth and to use all his intelligence, to put his feelings into his work so that it becomes comprehensible to others. But working with an eye to saleability isn’t exactly the right way in my view, but rather is cheating art lovers. The true artists didn’t do that; the sympathy they received sooner or later came because of their sincerity. I know no more than that, and don’t believe I need to know any more. Making an effort to find art lovers and arouse their love is something else, and of course permissible. But it mustn’t become a speculation that might well go wrong and would certainly waste time that ought to be spent on work. Of course you’ll find things in my present watercolours that should be taken out, but that must improve with time.  But you should know that I’m a long way from having a system or anything like that to keep up and lock myself into. That sort of thing exists in H.G.T.’s imagination, for example, rather than in reality. As for H.G.T., you understand that I have a personal reason for my opinion of him, and that I don’t in the least intend to press you, for example, to take the same view of him as I am forced to do. As long as he thinks and says of me the kind of things you know of, I can’t regard him either as a friend or as someone of use to me in any way, but quite the opposite. And I fear that his opinion of me is too firmly rooted ever to change, all the more so because, as you say yourself, he won’t take the trouble to reconsider some things and to change. 
   When I see how several painters I know here struggle with their watercolours and paintings, unable to find the answer, I sometimes think, friend, your drawing is where the trouble lies. I don’t for a moment regret not moving straight on to watercolour and painting. I know for sure that I’ll catch up if I keep hacking away at it, so that my hand doesn’t hesitate in drawing and perspective. But when I see young painters composing and drawing off the top of their head — then daubing on all sorts at random, also off the top of their head — then holding it at a distance and putting on a very profound, sombre expression to find out to what in God’s name it might bear some resemblance, and finally, still off the top of their head, making what they can of it, it makes me feel feeble and faint, and I find it truly tedious and heavy going.  The whole thing makes me sick! Yet these gentlemen regularly ask me — not without a certain patronizing air — ‘whether I’ve started painting yet’.  Now I also sometimes find myself playing, so to speak, at random on a piece of paper, but I attach no more value to this than to a rag or cabbage leaf.  And I hope you’ll understand that if I go on just drawing, I do that for two reasons. Because at all costs I want to acquire a sure hand when drawing above all else and, second, because painting materials and watercolours entail considerable expense for which there’s no return in the early stage — and these costs are multiplied twice and ten times if you work on the basis of a drawing that isn’t yet sufficiently correct. 
   And if I got into debt or surrounded myself with canvases and papers daubed all over with paint without being sure of my drawing, my studio would quickly become a kind of hell, like a studio I once saw that seemed like that to me.  As it is, I always enjoy going there, and work there with pleasure. So I don’t believe that you suspect me of unwillingness. It seems to me that the painters here have a way of reasoning as follows. They say, you must do this or that — if you don’t do it, or not immediately or exactly, or if you object, the reply is: ‘So you know better than I do, do you?’ Thus immediately, sometimes within 5 minutes, there’s a conflict between you. And the situation is such that neither side can move forwards or backwards. The least odious outcome of this is if one of the two parties has the presence of mind to keep silent and in one way or another quickly slip away through some opening. And would almost say, Sapristi, the painters are a family too. That’s to say, an ill-fated association of people with conflicting interests, each one at odds with the rest, two or more of whom share the same feelings only when they join forces to obstruct another member. I hope, my dear brother, that this definition of the word ‘family’ doesn’t always apply, especially not in the case of the painters or our own family. I hope with all my heart that peace will reign in our family, and I remain with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
    to make it difficult for them if they’d rather not see me.  I refused, even when they asked me lately whether I wouldn’t come sometime, so that they’d clearly see that I didn’t want to make it difficult for them in any way. But I also expect that they, for their part, won’t meddle in my affairs. While I care about the good will of those at home, Princenhage10 matters much less to me. Would you and can you be so good as not to talk about one thing and another, so much the better, if, though, it is talked about and that can’t be avoided — too bad, but what do I care?  Well, as I said, I want nothing so much as to keep the peace, nothing is as necessary for my work as that very peace. So I’m grateful to you for everything you can do to reassure those at home and to keep them calm. I hope that you’ll have pleasant days there and breathe in plenty of Brabant air. I still think of Het Heike so often, and have again been busy these last few days with a study from there, cottages with mossy roofs under the beech trees.
    Where the black is darkest in this little sketch is where the greatest strengths are in the watercolour — dark green, brown, dark grey. Well, adieu, and believe me that I sometimes laugh heartily at how people suspect me (who am really just a friend of nature, of study, of work — and of people chiefly) of various acts of malice and absurdities which I never dream of. Anyway — goodbye for now, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Saturday.  My dear Theo, Still very much under the impression of your visit, and more than a little pleased that I can go on painting with new vigour, I’m writing you a few words. I had wanted to take you to the train the next morning — but I thought you had already given me so much time that it would have been impolite if I had asked you for the following morning as well. I’m very grateful to you for visiting me here — it’s wonderful to have the prospect of a year of steady work without disasters, and thanks to what you gave me I now also have a new horizon in painting. I regard myself as privileged above a thousand others in that you remove so many barriers in my way. It goes without saying that many often can’t carry on because of the expense; well, I can hardly put into words how thankful I am to be able to keep on working steadily.  I have to try twice as hard to make up for lost time because I began later than others, and with the best will in the world I would have to give up if I didn’t have you.  Let me tell you about everything I’ve bought.  First, a large moist colour box for 12 pieces or tubes of watercolour with a folding lid that serves as a palette when open — there’s also room for 6 brushes.
   This is a valuable piece of equipment for working out of doors, in fact absolutely essential, but it’s expensive and in my mind I had postponed it until later, and until now worked with loose pieces on saucers, but they’re awkward to carry, especially if you have other items as well.  So it’s a fine thing to have, and once you have one it will last you for a long time. At the same time I bought a supply of watercolour and replaced my brushes and added some new ones.  Moreover, I now have all the essentials for proper painting.  And a supply of paint — big tubes (which work out much cheaper than small ones), but you will understand that I’ve limited myself to simple colours in both watercolour and oil: ochre (red, yellow, brown), cobalt and Prussian blue, Naples yellow, terra sienna, black and white, supplemented with some carmine, sepia, vermilion, ultramarine, gamboge in smaller tubes.  But I refrained from buying colours one ought to mix oneself.  I believe this is a practical palette, with sound colours. Ultramarine, carmine or something else are added if absolutely necessary. 
   I’ll start with small things — but before the summer ends I hope to practise bigger sketches in charcoal with an eye to painting in a rather larger format later. This is why I’m having a new and, I hope, better perspective frame6 made, which will stand firmly on two legs in uneven ground like the dunes.  Like this, for example. What we saw together at Scheveningen, sand — sea — sky — is something I certainly hope to express one day. Of course I didn’t spend everything you gave me all at once — although I must say the prices of things greatly took me aback, especially bearing in mind that more items are needed than appears at first sight. 
   It would be a help if you could send the usual around the twentieth, not because everything will be gone by then, but because I think it advisable to keep a little in my pocket in case, while working, I find that I really need something or other. That will help me to work calmly and in an orderly fashion. The moist colour box fits into the painting box — so that if need be I can carry everything required both for watercolour and for painting in one object. I place great value on having good materials, and would like my studio to look substantial — but without antiquities or tapestries and drapery7 — but through the studies on the walls and good tools. That will have to come with work and time.  On the subject of the village constable style8 — I feel less like a village constable than like a Delft bargee, for example, and I don’t at all object to my place being like a cosy tow barge. Yesterday afternoon I was in the attic of Smulders’ paper warehouse on Laan. There I found — guess what — double Ingres under the name Papier Torchon: it was a type with an even coarser grain than yours. I’m sending you a sample to show you. There’s a whole batch — already old and mature, excellent. I bought only half a quire10 for now, but I can always go back later. I was there in search of something else, namely the Honig paper that I have now and then, very cheap, from an undelivered order for the land registry. That is very suitable for charcoal drawing, I believe, and comes in large sheets tinted rather like the Harding type. As you see, this sample has a grain as coarse as a piece of sailcloth. What you brought is a nicer colour and wonderful, for example, for studies of the sides of ditches and soils. However, I’m glad to have discovered this new batch. Well, old chap, many thanks for everything, a handshake in thought; I’m going to start work. Give Pa and Ma my warmest regards, thank them for what they gave you for me, and tell them I’ll write soon — but as agreed not about special matters. Adieu — enjoy yourself, and have a safe return to your ordinary work, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, In my last letter you’ll have found a little scratch of that perspective frame. I’ve just come back from the blacksmith, who has put iron spikes on the legs and iron corners on the frame.  It consists of two long legs:  The result is that on the beach or in a meadow or a field you have a view as if through a window. The perpendicular and horizontal lines of the frame, together with the diagonals and the cross — or otherwise a grid of squares — provide a clear guide to some of the principal features, so that one can make a drawing with a firm hand, setting out the broad outlines and proportions. Assuming, that is, that one has a feeling for perspective and an understanding of why and how perspective appears to change the direction of lines and the size of masses and planes. Without that, the frame is little or no help, and makes your head spin when you look through it.  I expect you can imagine how delightful it is to train this view-finder on the sea, on the green fields — or in the winter on snow-covered land or in the autumn on the fantastic network of thin and thick trunks and branches, or on a stormy sky. 
   With CONSIDERABLE practice and with lengthy practice, it enables one to draw at lightning speed and, once the lines are fixed, to paint at lightning speed. It’s in fact especially good for painting, because a brush must be used for sky, ground, sea. Or, rather, to render them through drawing alone, it’s necessary to know and feel how to work with the brush. I also firmly believe my drawing would be strongly influenced if I were to paint for a while. I tried it back in January but that came to a halt — the reason for stopping, apart from a few other things, was that I was still too hesitant when drawing. Now six months have passed, devoted entirely to drawing. So now I’m beginning anew with fresh heart. The frame really has become an excellent piece of equipment — it’s a pity you still haven’t seen it. It has cost me a pretty penny, too, but I had it made so solidly that I shan’t wear it out in a hurry. On Monday I’ll start doing large charcoal drawings with it, as well as painting small studies — if those two things come off, I hope that better painted work will soon follow.  So by the time you next come to see me I would like the studio to have become a real painter’s studio. The fact that I couldn’t get going in January — you know that there were various reasons for that, but in the end it can be seen as a fault in the machine, a screw or a rod that wasn’t strong enough and had to be replaced by a stronger one.  Another thing I’ve bought for myself is a tough, warm pair of trousers, and, since I bought a pair of sturdy shoes just before you came, I’m now fully prepared to face the elements. At the same time my aim is to learn a couple of things about technique through this landscape painting which I feel I’m in need of for my FIGURES, namely rendering different fabrics, and the tone and colour. In a word, the expression of the body — the mass — of things. It’s as a result of your visit that I’m moving on to this, but before you came not a day passed without my thinking about it along these lines. But I would have gone on for longer with just black and white and the outline. But there’s no turning back now. Adieu, old chap, again a warm handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, In the days since you left I’ve done some experimenting with painting. And thought you might be curious to know how I’m getting on. I do wish that you could be back in the studio for just an hour — that would be the best way to tell you how it turned out. Since that is, of course, impossible, I just want to say that I have 3 painted studies. One of a row of pollard willows in the meadow (behind the Geestbrug), then a study of the cinder road close to my neighbourhood — and today I was again in the vegetable gardens in Laan van Meerdervoort, where I found a potato field with a ditch. A man in a blue smock and a woman were gathering up the potatoes, and I put their figures in. The field was white, sandy ground — half dug over, half still covered by rows of dried stalks — with green weeds in between. In the distance dark green and a few roofs. I took the greatest pleasure in doing the last study in particular. I must say that painting is not as alien to me as you might think. On the contrary, I find it very appealing on account of it being a powerful means of expression. 
   And at the same time one can say delicate things with it too — let a soft grey or green speak in the midst of roughness. I’m very glad that I have the necessary equipment, because in the past I often had to restrain myself. It opens up a much broader horizon.  Now I would like quietly to amass a good number of painted studies to hang in my studio without referring to this as a change. And should anyone express surprise at seeing painted work by me, to say: Well, did you think I had no feeling for that or couldn’t do it? But I’ve put a lot of work into drawing and will continue to do so, because it’s the backbone of painting, the skeleton supporting everything else. I’m enjoying it so much, Theo, that I’ll have to restrain rather than push myself because of the costs. These studies are of medium size, though slightly larger than the lid of an ordinary painting box, because I don’t work in the lid, but instead pin the painting paper for the study to a frame with canvas stretched across it, which is easy to carry. Before I paint bigger things, I’ll draw them bigger. Or, if I can find out the technique — I’ll look into it — make what they call grisailles4 of them. 
   It becomes too expensive a business if you’re not sparing with the paint.  But, old chap, it’s wonderful for me that I’ve once again been given so many good tools — thanks again for everything. I’ll do my best to ensure that you need have no regrets, but rather the satisfaction of seeing the progress made.  I’m writing now just for the time being to say that I’ve made a start. It goes without saying that the studies must become more beautiful — and that certainly they have their shortcomings too — but I believe that even in these first ones you’ll already see that there’s something of the open air in them, something that proves I have a feeling for nature and the heart of a painter. Herewith a small scratch of Laan van Meerdervoort. The vegetable gardens there have a sort of Old Dutch cachet that always appeals to me.  Well, good-night, it’s late, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent I’m busy with Zola’s ‘La curée’.

   When I’d written this letter, I realized that it lacked something. I thought — I must ensure that I can write to him that I’ve tackled a piece of sand, sea and sky like we saw together at Scheveningen. Then I kept my letter back and marched off to the beach this morning, and have just got back with a fairly large painted study of sand, sea and sky, and a few fishing-boats and men on the beach. There’s still dune sand in it, and I assure you this won’t be the last one. I thought you’d be pleased that I’ve tackled this.  As said, I want to make sure that when you come again, in six months or a few months or a year, the studio has become a painter’s studio. These scratches were done in great haste, as you can see. Now that it’s going well, I’ll try to strike while the iron’s hot and carry on painting for a little. If you can send the usual towards the 20th, there’s no question but that I’ll be able to occupy myself exclusively with it for a while. I believe that after a month of regular painting the studio will look completely different. Hoping that this will please you, I shake your hand again, and warmly wish you good fortune in everything. 
    I can’t possibly draw the effect quickly here, but this shows the composition.  Yet it was all a question of colour and tone, the gradations of the range of colours in the sky, first a lilac haze — inside it the red sun, half covered by a dark purple cloud with a delicate edge of gleaming red; beside the sun vermilion reflections, but above a yellow band that turned green and higher up bluish, the so-called Cerulean blue, and here and there lilac and greyish clouds catching reflections from the sun.  The ground was a sort of tapestry of green — grey — brown, but full of different shades and movement — the water of the ditch gleams in that tonal ground.  It’s the sort of thing Emile Breton, for instance, would paint. 
   I’ve also painted a big piece of dune ground2 — impasted — and densely painted. In the case of these two, and of the small seascape3 and the potato field, I know for certain that people wouldn’t say, all things considered, that these were my first painted studies. To tell you the truth, it surprises me a little. I thought that the first things would look like nothing at all, although they would improve later, I thought, though I say so myself, that they do look like something, and that rather amazes me. I believe that this is because, before I began painting, I spent so long drawing and studying perspective so that I could put together a thing I saw.  Well, since I bought my paint and materials, I have toiled and laboured, so that at the moment I’m dead tired, having done 7 painted studies. There’s also one with a figure — a mother with a child in the shadow of a big tree, in tone against a dune on which the summer sun is shining. An almost Italian effect. I literally couldn’t hold myself back — I couldn’t leave it alone or take a break from it.  As you may know, there’s an exhibition by the Drawing Society. There’s one Mauve — a woman at a sort of loom, no doubt from Drenthe — that I think is superb.
   You’ve probably seen some of them at Tersteeg’s. There are wonderful works by Israëls — among them the portrait of Weissenbruch, with a pipe in his mouth and his palette in his hand. And some beautiful things by Weissenbruch himself, landscapes, and a seascape as well. There’s a very large drawing by J. Maris, townscape10 — amazing. And a fine W. Maris, Sow with piglets, among others, and cows.  Neuhuys, Du Chattel, Mesdag. By the last, apart from a splendid large seascape, two Swiss things that I find rather inane and heavy-handed. But the large seascape is splendid.  Israëls has another 4 large drawings, a girl at the window16 — children at the pig-sty17 — the drawing of the small Salon painting — a little old woman stoking the fire in the twilight, which was etched for the Kunstkronijk at the time. It’s stimulating to see something like this, because then I see how much I still have to learn.  I just wanted to tell you — I feel that things with colour are becoming apparent in my painting that I didn’t use to have, things to do with breadth and strengths. I shan’t send you anything immediately — let it first ripen a little — but you should know that I’m full of enthusiasm, and believe that it’s going well at the moment.b (Before 3 months have passed, however, I’ll send you something to keep you informed and give you an idea.) But for me that’s precisely a reason to push on — and to learn what I still need. 
   So don’t take what I say about my own work as meaning that I’m already content with it — the opposite is true, but I believe that this much has been gained, that if something in nature strikes me I now have more means at my disposal with which to express it more forcefully.  And I don’t find it disagreeable that from now on what I make will look more appealing.  I also don’t think that it would be a hindrance if my health let me down on occasion. As far as I can make out, it isn’t the worst painters who can’t work for a week or a fortnight now and then. Sometimes the reason for this is that they’re the very ones who ‘put their heart and soul into it’, as Millet says. That doesn’t matter, and in my view one shouldn’t spare oneself when it comes to the point. One may be exhausted for a while, but one recovers, and the advantage is that one has gathered in one’s studies, just like the farmer does his corn or hay. Now for my part I’m not yet thinking about ‘having a rest’. But yesterday, Sunday, I didn’t do much, at least I didn’t go out of doors. I want to make sure that even if you come as early as this winter you’ll find the studio full of painted studies.  I received a letter from Rappard yesterday. He has been to Drenthe, and judging by two sketches he sent me he hasn’t been idle. He seems to be working very hard, and well too, both on figures and landscape.  Well, adieu, I must go out, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent It’s now almost exactly two years ago that I began drawing in the Borinage. Sunday afternoon. My dear Theo, I’ve just received a good letter from home which truly gives me great pleasure, and from which it’s clear that your visit and the things you said about me and my work have left an impression that reassures them.  I believe this can only have desirable consequences, and I thank you in particular for the way in which you talked about me, though it seems to me you’ve praised me more about one thing and another than I yet deserve. At home they seem to be very pleased with their new surroundings, and are still full of your visit.  As I am myself, by the way, for various things you said to me cause me to think of you even more than I used to, certainly not with less affection. What you told me about your health, in particular, makes me think of you often.  I am well — I feel fine not avoiding anything because of it, and just carrying on. But, as you’ll understand, it isn’t entirely over. At times, mainly in the evening when I’m tired, it troubles me, but fortunately it’s no longer such that it stops me working. This week I painted a few fairly large studies in the woods which I’ve tried to work up more highly and elaborate more than the first ones. 
   The one I believe I’ve been most successful with is no more than a piece of ground dug over — white, black and brown sand after a downpour. So that the clods of earth catch the light here and there and are more expressive. After I’d been sitting in front of that piece of ground for a while drawing, there came a thunderstorm with torrential rain that lasted a good hour. I had become so gripped, however, that I stayed at my post and sheltered as best I could behind a thick tree. When it had finally passed and the crows took to the air again, I wasn’t sorry I had waited, because of the wonderfully deep tone the ground of the wood had taken on after the rain. Because I had started before the storm on my knees with a low horizon, I now had to kneel down in the mud, and it’s because of similar adventures, which happen very often in different ways, that it seems sensible to me to wear ordinary working clothes that aren’t easily ruined.  The outcome this time was that I was able to take that piece of ground with me to the studio — although Mauve rightly said to me when we were discussing one of his studies that it’s a job to draw clods of earth and to get depth into them.  The other study from the woods is of big green beech trunks on a ground with dead leaves, and the small figure of a girl in white. The great difficulty there was to keep it clear and bring in space between the tree-trunks, which stand at different distances — and the place and relative thickness of the trunks altered by the perspective. To ensure, in short, that one can breathe and wander about in it — and smell the woods.  I particularly enjoyed doing these two. 
   Just as much as something I saw at Scheveningen.  A large expanse in the dunes in the morning after rain — the grass is very green, relatively speaking, and the black nets are spread out on it in huge circles, creating tones on the ground of a deep, reddish black, green, grey. Sitting, standing or walking on this sombre ground like strange dark ghosts were women in white caps, and men who spread out or repaired the nets. In nature it was as compelling, distinctive, sombre and severe as the finest one could imagine by Millet, Israëls or Degroux. Above the landscape a plain grey sky with a light band above the horizon. Despite showers of rain, I made a study of it on a sheet of oiled torchon. A lot needs to be done before I’ll be capable of working that up highly — but it’s things like this that I find most compelling in nature. How beautiful it is outdoors when everything is wet with rain — before — during — after the rain. I really ought not to miss a single shower. This morning I hung all the painted studies in the studio. I wish I could talk to you about them.  As I indeed expected and counted on while I was at work, I had to buy rather a lot extra, and the money is almost used up. I’ve now painted for a fortnight from early morning to late in the evening, so to speak, and if I continued like this it would work out too expensive as long as I’m not selling.  I think it possible that if you saw the work you would say that I shouldn’t paint only on occasion, when I took particular pleasure in it, but carry on with it regularly, as absolutely the main thing, even if it entailed higher costs. 
   But although I enjoy it tremendously, and probably won’t paint as much as my ambition and pleasure demand for the time being, because of the heavy costs, I reckon I’ll lose nothing by devoting much of my time to drawing, and do that just as eagerly. I am, however, in doubt — painting has proved less difficult than I expected — perhaps the course to adopt would be to concentrate every effort on toiling with the brush above all — but I declare I don’t know.  At any rate, I know for sure that drawing with charcoal is something I must now study more closely than in the past — at any rate I have enough to do and can carry on; even if I restrain myself somewhat as regards painting, I can work just as hard. If I’ve now painted quite a number of studies in a short time it’s also because I keep on working on them, and literally work all day, barely taking the time even to eat or drink.  In several studies there are small figures. I’ve also worked on a larger one and already scraped everything off twice, which you might perhaps have thought rash if you had seen the effect, but it wasn’t rash — the reason is that I feel I can do even better with more effort and study, and I’m absolutely determined to achieve that better result, whether it takes more time or less, more effort or less. Landscape the way I’ve now tackled it also definitely requires figures. These are studies for backgrounds that must be very thoroughly examined, because the tone of the figure depends on it, and the effect of the whole.  One of the things I like about painting is that for the same effort as for a drawing one takes home something that conveys the impression much better and is much more pleasing to look at. And at the same time more accurate.  In a word, it’s more rewarding than drawing. But it’s absolutely essential that one draw the objects in the correct proportion and position with some certainty before one begins.  If an error is made there, it will all come to nothing. 
   I’m looking forward to the autumn. By then I must make sure I stock up on paint and various things again. I’m particularly fond of the effects of yellow leaves against which the green beech trunks stand out so beautifully, and the figures no less.  The past few days I’ve been reading part of a rather melancholy book, ‘Brieven en dagboek’ of Gerard Bilders. He died at the age when I was more or less beginning. When I read it, I don’t regret making a late start. He was certainly unhappy and was often misunderstood, but at the same time I find a great weakness in him, something unhealthy in his character. It’s like the story of a plant that shoots up too early and can’t withstand the frost, and as a result one fine night it’s struck to the root and withers away. At first he does well — he’s a master as in the hothouse — making rapid growth there — but in Amsterdam he stands almost alone, and despite his brilliance he can’t cope there, and in the end he comes back to his father’s house, completely discouraged, dissatisfied, apathetic — and there he does some more painting and finally dies of consumption or another disease in his 28th year. What I dislike in him is that while painting he complains about terrible boredom and idleness as things he can do nothing about, and he carries on going round in the same stifling circle made up of his friends and the entertainments and way of life he’s so heartily sick of. In short, I find him a sympathetic figure, but I would rather read the life of père Millet9 or T. Rousseau10 or Daubigny. When you read Sensier’s book about Millet you take courage from it, but Bilders’s book makes you feel wretched. 
   In a letter by Millet I always find a list of difficulties, but then: ‘nonetheless I’ve made this or that’, and in addition to that constantly thinking about other things that he’s determined to do and does indeed carry out. And too often with G. Bilders it’s ‘I was in a bad mood this week and made a mess of things — and went to this or that concert or play which left me feeling even worse.’13 What strikes me in Millet is that simple ‘Nonetheless I must make this or that.’ Bilders is very witty and can heave grotesque sighs about manilas pointus that he fancies but cannot buy, and about tailors’ bills he sees no way of paying. He describes his anxiety about money matters so wittily that he himself and the reader can’t help laughing. Yet however wittily these things are put, I still don’t like them, and have more respect for the private difficulties of Millet, who says ‘Nonetheless there must be soup for the children,’15 and doesn’t talk about manilas pointus or entertainments.  What I want to say is this. G. Bilders was a romantic in his outlook on life, and he never got over his lost illusions. For my part I regard it as in a sense a privilege that I began when romantic illusions were a thing of the past. Now I have some way to catch up, work hard, but particularly when you have lost illusions behind you, work is something you need and one of the few pleasures left. And from this comes a great peace and calm.  I’m sorry that now it may be a year before you see what I’m painting all together — even if I send something now and again — and before we can discuss what to do and how. I believe I can assure you that my painting these things now will prove to be worthwhile. Perhaps what failed in January will now succeed.
   Do not, above all, suspect me of indifference as regards earning; I fully intend to take the shortest route to that end. Provided they are genuine and lasting earnings, of which I only see a prospect in my case if something truly good comes into my work, and not through working solely on saleability — which one pays for later — but through honest study of nature. If you could see from the paintings that they’d have the best chance of success, I wouldn’t, of course, refuse to paint more. But should it take a long time before it becomes saleable, I would be the first to say, in that case we must live as thriftily as possible in the meantime, and with drawing one avoids a lot of costs and very certainly makes sure and steady, if slow, progress. I see a change in these painted things, and I write to you about it because you’re better placed than I am to say how this might affect possible sales. It seems to me that at any rate the painted studies are more agreeable to look at than what I’ve drawn. For my part, I attach less importance to the more agreeable, less gaunt effect, and make the expression of more austere and manly things the aim I want to achieve, for which I must first labour hard. But if you were to say: work on those views of woods or landscapes or seascapes, then that needn’t get in the way of larger and more serious things, and I would have nothing against that. 
   It’s just that I would have to know that they were worth the brushes, the paint, the canvas, and that making a lot of them wasn’t a waste of money, but that the costs could be recouped. If that was or could become the case, it might be a way of enabling me to undertake more difficult things. In that case I would even work on them with great ambition. I want to begin by letting them ripen somewhat, by working them up a bit more highly. Then in a few months, say, I’ll send you something and we can see. I believe that most painters have worked their way up to higher things in this way. I wouldn’t want to make things that were bad in principle, tending towards the untrue and the false, because nature is too dear to me. But we’re faced with this question: I must make many more studies in order to achieve something higher and better. What will work out cheapest: drawing or painting those studies? If the paintings are unsaleable, it will certainly be cheaper to draw in charcoal or something else.  The reason why I myself am delighted with painting is not the agreeable appearance, but the fact that it throws light on other questions of tone and form and material before which I used to be helpless, but now I can attack them with this means. I do now see, for example, more opportunity to have another try with charcoal and get a result.  But supposing it was possible to recover the costs of painted studies, I want to say to you that in principle I would have nothing against that, now I see that I’m making some headway and that it could perhaps be an exceptional opportunity.  My only objection in principle is to expending paint on things that can also be learnt with something else, while there’s still no question of selling. I don’t want to put either you or me to great expense for no good purpose, but I see clearly that the painted things have a more agreeable appearance. This makes me unsure as to what to do. My money isn’t yet exhausted, but there isn’t much left. Today is the twentieth, if I’m not mistaken. This month I’ve spent less, not more, than usual on household needs. I’ve had to spend a lot all at once on painting materials, but much of that will last for some time. But everything is expensive. I hope you can send something soon. Accept a warm handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent  I sincerely hope that you won’t take this letter to mean that I already presume that something can be done with these first studies. C.M. once interpreted certain remarks by me in that way, though I had definitely not meant them like that. I used to be able to say, better than now at any rate, what something was worth and whether it was likely to sell or not. Now it’s clear to me each day that I no longer know, and what matters more to me now is to study nature rather than the prices of paintings.  But I believe I see that the painted studies have a much more agreeable look than either the black-and-white drawings or the watercolours that you saw recently. And this is why I’m in doubt as to whether it’s possible that, despite the higher costs, painting as absolutely the main pursuit might not work out cheaper.
 0  I would rather that you make this decision, because I believe you’re more competent than I am as regards judging the financial success, and I have complete confidence that your judgement will be correct.  And if I send you something sooner or later, it will be to find out whether you have any tips to give me, not to say: I reckon this or that is saleable — for I no longer feel able to say that. And I’ll also send it in any case to keep you abreast of what I’m working on.  You told me to do my best sometime to try to work up a drawing in watercolour — I believe that, precisely as a result of painting, I’ll be more capable than in the past if I go back to watercolour.  But if that doesn’t work out so well occasionally, you mustn’t lose heart, nor must I, and you mustn’t be afraid to make comments to me. I don’t systematically ignore comments made to me, but in many cases it takes longer to change something than to point out the change. I’ve just been putting things into practice that Mauve said to me in January and, for instance, painted that piece of ground as the result of a conversation about a study by him.  Saturday evening. My dear Theo, Please accept my sincere thanks for your letter and the enclosure. As soon as I received your letter I bought seven guilders’ worth of paint in one go in order to have a supply in reserve and fill up the gaps. All this week we’ve had gales, storms and rain here, and I’ve been to Scheveningen many times to see it. And came back with two small seascapes. There’s already a lot of sand in the one, but with the second, when there really was a storm and the sea came very close to the dunes, I had to scrape everything off twice because of the thick layer of sand completely covering it. The wind was so strong that I could barely stay on my feet and barely see through the clouds of sand. I tried to get it down anyway by immediately painting it again in a small inn behind the dunes, after first scraping it all off, and then going out to take another look from there. So I have a couple of souvenirs after all. But another souvenir is that I’ve caught a cold again, with the results you know about, which now force me to stay at home for a few days. In the meantime I’ve painted some figure studies — I’m sending you two scratches. Figure painting attracts me enormously, but it still has to ripen. I need to become better acquainted with the method — what is sometimes called ‘the cookery of art’. In the beginning I’ll have to scrape off a great deal — and often make a new start – but I feel that I’m learning as a result, and that it gives me a new, fresh view of things.  When you next send, I’ll get some good sable brushes. They’re the proper drawing brushes, I find — for drawing a hand or profile in colour. For delicate tree branches, &c. they’re really essential, I find. The Lyon brushes, though fine, make lines and strokes that are too broad. My painting paper5 is almost finished too — by 1 Sept. I’ll also need to get some other items quite urgently, but I’ll manage with the usual. 
   Now I wanted to tell you that I entirely agree with various things in your letter. Above all, that I absolutely concur that Pa and Ma, with all their pros and cons, are people who are very rare in this day and age — and all the more so as time passes — and perhaps the new is by no means better — and whom one therefore ought to appreciate all the more. For my part I do indeed appreciate them, only I fear that what you have now reassured them about for the time being would come back, especially if they saw me again. They’ll never be able to grasp what painting is, never understand that a figure of a digger — a few furrows of ploughed land — a bit of sand, sea and sky, are serious subjects and so difficult, but so beautiful too that it’s well worth the trouble of devoting one’s life to depicting the poetry that’s in them. Also, whenever in the future, even more than now, they should see me slogging and toiling away at my work — scratching out and altering — now making a close comparison with nature, and then introducing a change so that they can no longer exactly recognize the spot or the figure, that will always be a disappointment to them. They’ll be unable to understand that painting isn’t done at a stroke, and they’ll always fall back on the idea ‘that I can’t really do it’, and that real painters work in a totally different way.  In short, I dare not cherish any illusions and do fear that Pa and Ma will never take any real pleasure in it. This is hardly surprising and it’s not their fault — they haven’t learned to see as you and I have learned. They look at different things from us, and we don’t see the same things with the same eyes; they don’t evoke the same thoughts.  To wish that it could be different is permissible, to expect it is in my view unwise. 
   They’ll find it difficult to understand my state of mind, and not know what drives me when they see me do things that seem strange and peculiar to them — will blame them on dissatisfaction, indifference or nonchalance, while the cause lies elsewhere, namely the desire, at all costs, to pursue what I must have for my work. Now they may be waiting expectantly for ‘painting in oils’. Now it will come at last, and oh how disappointed they’ll be should they see it, I fear, seeing nothing but globs of paint in it. Besides, they regard drawing as a ‘preparatory study’, a term I’ve detested for years and believe is as incorrect as possible. As you well know. And if they see me doing that just as much as in the past, they’ll think I’m still engaged in preparatory study. Well. But we’ll hope for the best and do our best to reassure them. What you say about their new surroundings is most interesting. I certainly would like to try doing that kind of old church and churchyard with sandy graves and old wooden crosses.  I hope it will happen one day. You also write about a stretch of heath and a pine-wood nearby. Well, I have an everlasting nostalgia for heath and pine-woods with the curious figures. A woman gathering wood, a peasant fetching sand — in short, that simplicity that has something grand like the sea.  I always have in mind the idea of moving to the country if an opportunity arises, if circumstances suggest it. Although I have an abundance of material here — the woods, the beach, the Rijswijk meadows close by, and thus literally a subject at every footstep. It would also be for the sake of living more cheaply. But at the moment there’s no particular reason, as far as I can see, so there’s no urgency.  I only mention it so that you’ll understand how attracted I am by a country district like the one you describe that’s Pa and Ma’s new home. I’ve been made deeply happy by painting these last few days. I’ve really restrained myself and stuck to drawing, precisely because I know so many sad stories 
   of people who threw themselves into it unprepared — they concentrated on method and woke up disillusioned, without having made any progress, and got deep into debt because of the expensive things they botched. From the start I felt a fear and horror of that — I regarded and still regard drawing as the only way of avoiding the same fate. And drawing has become dear to my heart, rather than being a burden. Now, though, almost unexpectedly, painting has given me lots of room, enables me to tackle effects that used to be out of reach, especially those I find, after all, most appealing, and it gives me so much more insight into many issues and new means of expressing effects, so that all this makes me deeply happy.  It’s been so beautiful at Scheveningen the last few days. The sea was almost more imposing before the storm than when the storm actually arrived. During the storm the waves were less visible and there was less the effect of furrows of ploughed land. The waves followed each other so quickly that each pushed the other aside, and the collision between these bodies of water produced a sort of foam like drifting sand that shrouded the foreground of the sea in a haze. But it was a nasty little storm — all the nastier — and all the more impressive the longer you looked, because it made so little noise. The sea was the colour of dirty dishwater. At that spot there was a fishing-boat, the last in the row, and several dark figures. There’s something infinite about painting — I can’t quite explain — but especially for expressing a mood, it’s a joy. In the colours there are hidden harmonies or contrasts which contribute of their own accord, and which if left unused are of no benefit. Tomorrow I hope to be able to go outdoors again.  I’ve also read Zola’s La faute de l’abbé Mouret8 and Son Excellence Eugène Rougon, also beautiful. I find Pascal Rougon, the doctor, a noble figure — he appears in various works, but always in the background. He is proof that, however corrupt a lineage may be, it’s always possible to overcome fate through willpower and principles. In his profession he found a strength that was greater than that of the nature he inherited from his family, and instead of giving in to his natural tendencies he followed a straight, clear path, and didn’t slip into the murky waters in which all the other Rougons drowned. He and Mme François11 in Le ventre de Paris are the most sympathetic figures to me. Well, adieu, I think of you often and would love to see you from time to time. Accept a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent While writing this I’ve done another study of a boy, grisaille: charcoal, oil and very little colour, just for the tone. Sunday morning My dear Theo, I’ve just received your very welcome letter and want to reply immediately, since today I’m having a bit of a rest anyway. I thank you for it, and for the enclosure and for one or two things you say in it.  And for your description of the scene with the workmen in Montmartre, which I found most interesting, because you give the colours as well so that I can see it — many thanks.  I’m glad you’re reading the book about Gavarni. I thought it very interesting, and have become doubly attached to G. because of it. Paris and its surroundings may be beautiful, but we can’t complain here either. This week I painted something which I believe may give some idea of the impression of Scheveningen as we saw it when we walked there together. A large study of sand, sea, sky — a big sky of delicate grey and warm white through which an occasional spot of soft blue shines — the sand and the sea light — so that the whole becomes blond, though enlivened by the bold and distinctively coloured figures and pinks, which take on tone. The subject of the sketch I made of it is a pink weighing anchor. The horses stand ready to be hitched to the pink before pulling it into the sea. I enclose a scratch of it. I really laboured over it — I wish I’d painted it on panel or canvas. I tried to get more colour into it, namely depth, firmness of colour. It certainly is curious how you and I often seem to have the same thoughts. Yesterday evening, for example, I came back with a study of the woods, and this week in particular, especially then, I was very absorbed in the question of depth of colour. And would have liked to discuss it with you, particularly in connection with the study I had made — and lo and behold, in your letter of this morning you happen to remark on how you were struck in Montmartre by the very pronounced colours, which nonetheless remained harmonious. I don’t know if it was exactly the same thing that struck us, but I’m absolutely sure you would also have felt what particularly struck me and probably seen it in the same way. I’ll begin by sending you a scratch of the subject and telling you what the problem was. The woods are already getting really autumnal — there are colour effects which I only rarely see depicted in Dutch paintings. 
   Yesterday evening I was occupied with an area of woodland with a slight upward slope covered in rotting and dead beech leaves. The ground was lighter and darker red-brown, all the more so because of the cast shadows of trees that threw bands across, weaker or stronger, half blotted out. The problem, and I found it to be most difficult, was to get the depth of colour — the enormous strength and fixity of that area — and yet it was only while painting that I noticed how much light there still was in that darkness. To keep it light and yet keep the glow, the depth of that rich colour, for there’s no carpet imaginable as splendid as that deep brown-red in the glow of an autumnal evening sun, although tempered by the wood.  Out of the ground shoot young beech trees that catch the light on one side — are brilliantly green there — and the shaded side of those trunks a warm, strong black-green. Beyond these trunks, beyond the brown-red ground, is a sky, a very delicate blue-grey, warm — almost not blue — sparkling. And set against this is another hazy edge of greenness and a network of slender trunks and yellowish leaves. A few figures gathering wood move about like dark masses of mysterious shadows. The white cap of a woman who bends over to pick up a dry branch suddenly stands out against the deep red-brown of the ground. A skirt catches the light — a cast shadow falls — a dark silhouette of a fellow appears on top of the undergrowth against the brushwood fence. A white cap, bonnet, shoulder, bust of a woman set off against the sky. These figures — they’re large and full of poetry — appear in the half-light of the deep shadow tone like huge terracottas7 being made in a studio. I’m describing nature to you — to what extent I conveyed it in my sketch I’m not sure myself — but I do know that I was struck by the harmony of green, red, black, yellow, blue, brown, grey. It was very Degroux-like, an effect similar, for example, to that sketch of the conscript’s departure formerly in the Palais Ducal. Painting it was hard graft. There are one and a half large tubes of white in the ground — yet that ground is very dark — in addition red, yellow, brown ochre, black, terra sienna, bistre, and the result is a red-brown that varies from bistre to deep wine-red and to pale, blond reddish. Then there are also mosses and an edge 
   of fresh grass that catches the light and sparkles brightly and is very difficult to get. There at last you have a sketch which — whatever may be said about it — I maintain has some meaning, says something.  While making it I said to myself: let me not leave before there’s something of an autumn evening in it, something mysterious, something with seriousness in it.  However, because this effect doesn’t last, I had to paint quickly. The figures were done with a few vigorous strokes with a firm brush — in one go. I was struck by how firmly the slender trunks stood in the ground — I began them using a brush, but because of the ground, which was already impasted, one brushstroke simply disappeared. Then I squeezed roots and trunks into it from the tube, and modelled them a little with the brush. Yes, now they stand in it — shoot up out of it — stand firmly rooted in it. In a sense I’m glad that I’ve never learned how to paint. Probably then I would have learned to ignore effects like this. Now I say, no, that’s exactly what I want — if it’s not possible then it’s not possible — I want to try it even though I don’t know how it’s supposed to be done. I don’t know myself how I paint. I sit with a white board9 before the spot that strikes me — I look at what’s before my eyes — I say to myself, this white board must become something — I come back, dissatisfied — I put it aside, and after I’ve rested a little, feeling a kind of fear, I take a look at it — then I’m still dissatisfied — because I have that marvellous nature too much in mind for me to be satisfied — but still, I see in my work an echo of what struck me, I see that nature has told me something, has spoken to me and that I’ve written it down in shorthand. In my shorthand there may be words that are indecipherable — errors or gaps — yet something remains of what the wood or the beach or the figure said — and it isn’t a tame or conventional language which doesn’t stem from nature itself but from a studied manner or a system. 
   Herewith also a scratch from the dunes. Standing there were small bushes whose leaves are white on one side and dark green on the other, and which constantly move and sparkle. Behind them dark wood.  As you see, I’m immersing myself in painting with all my strength — I’m immersing myself in colour — I’ve held back from that until now, and don’t regret it. If I hadn’t drawn I would never have felt or tackled a figure that looks like an unfinished terracotta. But now, I feel I’m on the high seas — painting must proceed with all the strength that we can muster.  If I work on panel or canvas, the costs go up again — everything is so expensive — paint is expensive too, and is used up so quickly. Well, these are drawbacks that all painters face — we must see what’s possible. I know for sure that I have a feeling for colour that will develop more and more, that painting is in my very marrow. I appreciate it enormously that you support me so loyally and strongly. I think of you so often — I would so much like my work to be substantial, serious, manly, and for it to give you pleasure as soon as possible.  I want to bring one thing to your attention as important. Wouldn’t it be possible to get paint, panels, brushes, &c. for the net price? At present I have to pay the retail price. Are you in touch with Paillard or someone like that? If so, it seems to me it would work out considerably cheaper to buy paint, for example, in larger quantities, such as white, ochre, terra sienna, and we could come to an arrangement as to the money. It would of course be cheaper. Think about it, if you will. Good painting doesn’t consist in using a great deal of paint, but to give a ground true strength, to make a sky bright, sometimes one mustn’t worry about a tube more or less.  Sometimes the subject requires that one paints thinly, sometimes the material, the nature of the things, makes it self-evident that they must be impasted. At Mauve’s — who paints very soberly in comparison with J. Maris, and even more so in comparison with Millet or Jules Dupré — in the corners of the studio there are nevertheless cigar boxes with the remains of tubes as numerous as the empty bottles in the corners of rooms at a soirée or meal such as Zola describes, for example. Now, if this month a little extra is possible, that would be wonderful. If not, then not. I’ll work as far as I can. You enquire after my health, but how’s yours? I believe that my remedy could also be yours. Being outdoors, painting. I’m well. I’m still troubled when I’m tired, but it’s getting better rather than worse. I believe that it’s also beneficial that I live as frugally as possible, but painting is my chief remedy. I hope with all my heart that you have some happiness and will find much more. Accept a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent As you see, in the scratch of the seascape there’s a blond, soft effect, and in the woods a more sombre, serious mood. I’m glad that both of these exist in life. 
    My dear Theo, Just a few words to congratulate you on 10 Sept. I don’t know whether I told you that I’ve had a letter from Wil in which she gives a quite charming description of the countryside at Nuenen. It does seem to be really beautiful there. I’ve asked her for more information on one or two points about the weavers, who especially interest me. I saw that at the time in the Pas de Calais2 — inexpressibly beautiful.  But in the meantime I don’t need to paint weavers, although sooner or later I hope I’ll get round to that. Now it’s autumn in the woods — that preoccupies me.  There are two things about the autumn that particularly attract me. Sometimes there’s a gentle melancholy in the falling leaves, in the tempered light, in the haziness of things, in the elegance of the slender trunks. Then, I like the more robust, rougher side just as much — the strong light effects, for example on a digger3 sweating in the midday sun. Herewith a few scratches of studies I did this week.  I’ve been thinking again about the workmen in Montmartre you described in your last letter. I vaguely recalled that there was someone who did them extremely well.  I mean A. Lançon. I had another look at the woodcuts I have by him — how clever that chap is. Among them I saw a gathering of rag-pickers, a soup distribution6 and Gang of snow-shovellers, which I think is splendid. And he’s so productive — it’s as if he just dashes them off. 
   Speaking of woodcuts, this week I found some fine ones — from L’Illustration. It’s a series by Paul Renouard, The prisons of Paris. What beautiful things it contains. If I can’t sleep at night, which often happens, I always rummage among the woodcuts with new enjoyment.  Another excellent draughtsman is J. Mahoney, who illustrated the Household edition of Dickens. I believe that through painting I’ll come to feel the light better, so that in my drawings, too, there’ll be something very different.  How much is involved before one can express something — but in that very difficulty lies a stimulus.  
   Here’s another scratch from the woods. I’ve made a large study of it. I feel the power to produce so strongly within myself, I’m aware that there will come a time when I’ll finish something good, so to speak, daily, and do so regularly. At present hardly a day passes without my making a few things, but it isn’t yet what I really want.  Well — sometimes it seems to me that I’ll become productive very soon — I shouldn’t be surprised if it happens one fine day. I’ve an idea that in any case painting will also indirectly awaken something in me. Here, for example, is a scratch of the potato market in Noordwal. The bustle of workmen and women, with the baskets being unloaded from the barge — it’s a very interesting sight. These are things I would like to paint or draw forcefully. The life and movement of such a scene, and the types of folk. It doesn’t surprise me, though, that I can’t do this straightaway, and that so far when I try I’ve often failed. Now, through painting, I’ll certainly become handier with colours, and better able to capture such a subject. Well, the point is to be patient and carry on working. I’m sending you the scratch — I make so many like this — precisely to tell you that things like that scene, say, with the workmen in Montmartre do indeed preoccupy me. They require a general knowledge of the figure that I’m trying to gain by drawing large figure studies. And provided I continue to work on that, I firmly believe that, as I say, I’ll reach the point where I can express the bustle of workmen I see on the street or outdoors.
   The place where I saw the potato market is so interesting. All the poor people from the Geest district, from Ledig Erf12 and from all the courtyards in that neighbourhood come to it. Similar scenes take place there all the time: now it’s a barge with peat, then one with fish, then with coal or something else. I have a host of sketches by English artists from Ireland — I think the neighbourhood I’m writing about probably has much in common with an Irish town. I’m doing my very best to put all my energy into it, for I long so much to make beautiful things. But beautiful things require effort — and disappointment and perseverance.  Here’s a part of the woods in the evening after rain. I can’t tell you how superb that effect was in nature, with the bronze of the greenery and the fallen leaves here and there. I wish you could walk there in the evening sometime, in the superb autumn woods here. What I’ll bring out of it this year will be only a meagre harvest. Well, a few things nevertheless I hope, and with time more and more.  Meanwhile, my paint is finished. I sincerely hope you aren’t hard pressed yourself. At all events, I hope you’ll be able to send the usual on 10 Sept. This afternoon I must go to the potato market — it’s impossible to paint there because of the crowd — they’re enough trouble already. One ought to be allowed to enter any of the houses and sit down at the windows without further ado. Anyway, it’s Saturday evening, and so there’s bound to be something to do that makes a typical scene.  Wishing you the very best — be assured that I think of you every day. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve just received your letter and the 50 francs enclosed, for which many thanks.  Enclosed are two small watercolours. As you know, when you were here you said that I should do my best to send you a drawing in the genre known as ‘saleable’. You must forgive me, however, for not knowing exactly when a drawing may or may not be classed in this genre. I believe I used to be able to see this, but now I do realize daily that I get it wrong.  Well, I hope that the small bench, even if not yet saleable, will show you that I have nothing against tackling subjects with something agreeable or pleasant about them, which are thus more likely to find buyers than things with a more sombre sentiment.  I’m adding another to the small bench as a pendant, also a part of the woods. I drew the bench after a larger watercolour that I’m working on in which the tones are deeper, but I don’t know whether I’ll succeed in carrying it out or completing it. The other was done after a painted study. Now I’d very much like to hear from you whether in your view this little drawing is more or less in the spirit of what we discussed. I’m sending it to you because I wouldn’t like you to think that this wasn’t on my mind — but later I hope to send you something better. 
   You recall that in my last letter I wrote that I was going to that potato market. I brought back many croquis then, it was extraordinarily interesting. The politeness of the populace of The Hague towards painters is, however, demonstrated by the fact that a fellow behind me, or probably at a window, suddenly spat a wad of tobacco onto my paper — life can be very trying at times.  Well, there’s no need to take it personally, because these people aren’t malicious, but they don’t understand anything about it, and probably think someone like me mad when they see me doing a drawing with great scratches and lines which they can make nothing of.  Recently I’ve also been busy drawing horses on the street4 — I would like to have a horse pose sometime. Yesterday I heard someone behind me say: well, what kind of a painter is that? — he’s drawing the horse’s backside instead of doing him from the front. I rather enjoyed that comment.  I love it so much, sketching on the street, and, as I wrote in my last letter, I’m determined to achieve a certain standard in it.  Do you know an American periodical called Harper’s Monthly Magazine? – there are marvellous sketches in it. I don’t know it very well, I’ve only seen six months of it and have only 3 issues myself, but there are things in it I find astounding. Among them a glass-blower’s and an iron foundry, all kinds of scenes of factory work. As well as sketches of a Quaker town in the old days by Howard Pyle.
   I’m full of new pleasure in things because I have fresh hope of myself being able to make something with some soul in it.  What you write about the money that you lent and didn’t get back is certainly a disaster. From this I still have to pay for paint and buy a new supply, so by 20 Sept. I’ll definitely be running short. But I’ll vary the work a little and manage to get by. But remember that something extra will of course help me make extra progress — more successfully than otherwise. A great deal is required and everything’s expensive. But in any event I’m doubly grateful to you, and count myself more fortunate than many that things are as they are with the money, and I assure you I’m doing my best to make sure I make progress with it.  Today I’ll go to the ordinary Monday market again about the time they’re taking down the stalls to see if there’s something to sketch.  Adieu, good luck with everything. Do write again soon, and remember that I always greatly enjoy descriptions like the one of Montmartre. 
   There’s so much paint around that it has even got onto this letter7 — I’m working on the big watercolour of the bench. I hope it comes off, but the great problem is to retain detail with deep tone, and clarity is extremely difficult. Adieu again, a handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent I thank you for sending while you yourself are so hard pressed.  I need it twice as badly, because the autumn goes so quickly and it’s the finest season to work in.   My dear Theo, The weeks pass quickly — and we’re at Sunday again. Have been to Scheveningen quite often lately, and one evening, very interestingly, happened to see a pink arriving. There’s a wooden shed near the monument1 where a fellow keeps a look-out. As soon as the pink could clearly be seen approaching, the fellow emerged with a big blue flag, followed by a gang of children no higher than his knees. It was evidently a great pleasure for them to stand next to the man with the flag, and no doubt in their imagination to help bring the pink in. A few minutes after the man had waved his flag, a fellow rode up on an old horse – he was to get the anchor. The group was then joined by several men and women – including mothers with children — who were to receive the crew.  When the pink was close enough, the fellow on the horse went into the sea and returned with the anchor. Then the men were carried onto the beach on the backs of fellows in high waders, and there was a noisy welcome for each arrival.  When they were all ashore, the crowd trooped off home like a flock of sheep or a caravan, with the fellow on the camel, I mean the horse, rising above them like a tall wraith. Naturally, I tried to sketch the various events with my full attention.  I also painted something of it, namely the small group in the enclosed scratch. Then I also painted a study of a seascape, nothing but a bit of sand, sea, sky, grey and lonely3 — sometime I feel a need for that silence — where there’s nothing but the grey sea — with an occasional seabird. But otherwise, no other voice than the murmur of the waves. It’s in order to refresh me after the din of the Geest district or the potato market. Apart from that, this week I’ve worked mostly on sketches in watercolours. I’ve also come a long way with the large one of the bench, and in addition done a sketch of women in the hospital garden, and a bit of the Geest district. You’ll see from the accompanying scratch7 what I’m searching for. Groups of people doing something or other. 
   But how hard it is to get life and movement into it, and to get the figures in place and separate from each other. It’s that great problem — moutonner, groups of figures who, though forming a whole, gather to look with the heads and shoulders one above the other at the top, while in the foreground the legs of the first figures stand out clearly, and higher up the skirts and trouser-legs again form a sort of confused tangle in which there is nevertheless some detail. Then to right and left, depending on the viewpoint, the extension or shortening of the sides. As to composition, all possible scenes with figures, be it a market or the arrival of a boat, or a crowd of people at the soup kitchen — in the waiting room, the hospital, the pawnshop, the groups on the street, talking or strolling, are based on that same principle of the flock of sheep from which the word moutonner certainly derives — and everything comes down to the same questions of light and shade and perspective. The effect of the chestnut trees that you describe in your last letter is here too, as you’ll have seen from the drawing of the bench — it’s just that here one sees very little left of the new green leaves, although some time ago I noticed it too. But here they’ve been withered by the frequent gales. Perhaps we may soon have the true falling of the leaves here — that’s when, above all, I hope to paint many more studies of the woods. And no fewer of the beach for, though there are no effects of autumn leaves there, the peculiar light of autumn evenings does its work and it’s doubly beautiful there, as everywhere, at this time.  I’m a little concerned about paint and a few other things, but you know all about it, I can vary my work in several ways, and there is and will continue to be an endless amount of things to draw. Because the group of folk in the accompanying scratch has endless variations and requires countless separate studies and scratches of individual figures which one must catch on the street as if on the wing. Character and meaning must gradually come into it in that way. For instance, I recently drew a study of gentlemen and ladies on the beach9 — a flurry of strollers. I would be really pleased if sooner or later, after even more or even less effort, I could supply drawings for illustrated magazines. One might follow from the other. The point is to keep on working. I sincerely hope that you’re well, and would greatly welcome any news about yourself and what strikes you in your surroundings. Adieu, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent I’m so concerned that you yourself might perhaps be in serious difficulties as a result of what you wrote to me about, and do hope that it will be settled.  My dear Theo, When you were here we talked about that drawing1 that I was to send you — further to which I’ve already sent you that small bench. I’m enclosing a few sketches to show you that I do indeed plan to carry on working in that genre.  I’m working on a watercolour of the one with the herds of orphans with their spiritual shepherds3 — with which I’ll probably not succeed to the point of making it saleable.  But to show you that figures with some character in them don’t get there of their own accord, and that I nonetheless take great pleasure in overcoming that, I’m also sending you scratches of figure studies which I did recently, and which are of course more elaborate than these little sketches.  Supposing I had remained on good terms with Mauve, I believe that if I had done a watercolour like the small bench or the present one with the orphans, he would have given me tips that would have made it saleable and changed its final appearance. With many people’s watercolours or paintings it’s even the case that some painter or other does some work on them, sometimes transforming them completely. I miss that now, but although I certainly don’t disapprove of more skilled painters either giving tips or even doing some work (mainly because it’s so vital for the younger ones to earn a little in order to keep going), I don’t think it’s entirely a misfortune to wrestle alone. What one learns from oneself one learns less quickly, but it imprints itself more deeply.  I went to see the drawings in the Gothic Room. I thought the Rochussen superb. It was something from the Napoleonic period: French officers in a room in an old village hall who appear to be demanding papers or information from the mayor and the councillors. It was so real, that little old mayor and then those generals, just exactly as Erckmann-Chatrian describes it in Madame Thérèse. It gave me an extraordinary amount of pleasure. There were also very beautiful things by Allebé too, drawings from Artis, and also a landscape with pine trees on the rocks on the coast through which a fisherman’s house is seen below. There were beautiful town and beach views with small figures by Hoeterickx. However beautiful I find his present drawings, it seems to me a pity that he hasn’t stuck to his first manner, when he did types from the common folk (such as a painting At the pawnbroker’s).
   It’s more or less the same with drawing as with writing. When one learns to write as a child, one has the feeling that one will never discover how to do it, and it seems to be a miracle when one sees the schoolmaster write so quickly. Nevertheless, in time one grasps it. And I really believe that one must learn to draw in such a way that it’s as easy as writing something down, and that one must master proportion and learn to see in such a way that one can reproduce at will whatever one sees on a larger or smaller scale.  We’re having very beautiful bad weather at present — rain, wind, thunderstorms — but with splendid effects, that’s why I find it beautiful, but it does feel raw, by the way.  The time that one can sit outside is already getting decidedly shorter, and it’s important to make the most of it before winter comes.  Towards winter I empty the studio, namely take the studies off the walls and obstacles out of the way, so that I have a good space for working with models.  I feel that I need a host of figure studies, including Scheveningen ones.  When the opportunity arises I’d like to have the studies back that you don’t want to keep from among those you have, that is when there’s an opportunity to send them. If there’s something you would like to keep, or if there’s something you would like among what I have here, you only have to say so, for I regard it all as belonging to you. But if I ask for it back it’s because what one does directly from the model is often needed for watercolours, for example. But there’s no hurry, only don’t throw them away even if they’re not very beautiful, because everything is of use.  I don’t think I’m deceiving myself if I believe that being and remaining productive has to do with the studies one has and continues to make. The greater their variety, the harder one labours at them, the easier one works later when it comes to actual paintings or drawings. In short, I think of the studies as seed, and the more one sows the more one may hope to reap. In the last few days I’ve been reading Les deux frères by Erckmann-Chatrian, which is quite beautiful. It was certainly an interesting time when there were so many artists in Alsace: Brion, Marchal, Jundt, Vautier, Knaus, Schuler, Saal, Van Muyden, and many others surely15 — at the same time as a group of writers working in the same spirit like Chatrian and Auerbach. Personally, I prefer that to Tapiró or Capobianchi, or the host of other Italians who appear to be still multiplying. Adieu, believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
    
   You’ll see from this little scratch that I’ve begun doing what I spoke about in my last letter, namely trying to make notes regularly, either drawn or painted, of the scenes of workmen or fishermen that strike me, and these are precisely the things that could serve for illustrated magazines, I believe, if I practise them. It goes without saying, though, that then the types must be raised to a much higher standard.  I have at least 10 different events surrounding the arrival of that pink. Likewise the one I sent in an earlier letter, the weighing of the anchor. 
    My dear Theo, As I write to you, I’m already down to my last guilder. I hope to hear from you soon but, bearing in mind what you last wrote to me I think it very possible that you may not be able to spare the usual precisely on the twentieth. If that’s the case, I want to ask you to send whatever you can spare, be it more or less, even if it’s only a small part. A model is coming on Friday afternoon, a man from the almshouse, and I wouldn’t like to send him away unpaid.  I had some extra expenditure because my painting box got broken when I jumped from a high bank and, trying to grab my things as quickly as possible, had to get out of the way of a skittish horse in the Rijnspoor yards where they stockpile the coal. It’s very beautiful there — I had to ask permission to paint there, since it’s not a public area, and now hope to be there often. Meanwhile, on that occasion I painted the mounds of coal there, where men were pottering about, and there was a horse and cart. I also did a study of a courtyard with a bleaching ground and sunflowers.  It’s splendid outdoors. The leaves are all manner of bronze colours — green, yellow, reddish — all warm and rich.  I do so wish that you could see everything together — since your visit the studio has taken on a completely different appearance. It’s true that I’ve had 
   to spend quite an amount, but now there are a good number of painted studies on the walls. The courtyard and all that coal were so beautiful that I couldn’t resist them, although this week I wanted to draw because of the paint.  I would very much like, and am working towards this, to put things in my studio that will remind me when I see them each morning of this or that outdoors. So that I immediately know what to do with the day — and immediately take pleasure in something, or have the feeling: I must still go here or there sometime.  As regards sending you a painted study, I have nothing against that — but before I do, we must agree on a couple of things.  Someone like Mauve — any artist — undoubtedly has his own distinctive colour range. But no one had it on the first day, and in studies done out of doors it isn’t immediately apparent, even with painters who are much more experienced than I am.  Especially the studies by Mauve, which I find very beautiful precisely because of their soberness, and because they’re done with such fidelity. Yet they lack a certain charm which the paintings derived from them have in great measure.  And in my case the position is that, for example, the seascape I brought home most recently is already very different in colour from the first or second I started with.
   So you must make no judgement about my colour on the basis of what I can send now.  And if I would really prefer to wait until things are riper before sending, it’s because I believe I’ll change a great deal in colour. And in composition too. So that’s the first thing, and the second is that studies done out of doors are different from paintings intended to go out into the world. In my view the latter stem from the studies, but may, and indeed must, differ from them markedly. For in the painting the artist presents a more personal idea, and in a study his aim is simply to analyze a piece of nature. Either to give his thought or conception precision, or to arrive at a thought.  Thus studies belong more in the studio than in the trade, and shouldn’t be looked at from the same viewpoint as paintings.  Well, I believe that you’ll take the same view and will naturally take these things into consideration. But write and tell me what you’d like me to do, and rest assured that as regards sending or not sending yet I’ll do what seems best to you.  But what I would like most of all would be for you to see everything together — is there any possibility that you could come again in the winter sometime?  If so, I certainly think it would be better if I don’t send. Anyway. But rest assured that I pay close attention to whatever you say about the work with a view to saleability and bear it in mind, and don’t imagine that I treat your opinion lightly. 
   I regard making studies as Sowing, and making paintings as reaping.  I believe that one thinks much more healthily when the ideas arise from direct contact with things than when one looks at things with the aim of finding this or that in them.  It’s the same with the question of the use of colour. There are colours that are naturally beautiful seen together, but I do my best to make it as I see it, before I set to work to make it as I feel it. And yet, feeling is a big thing, and without that one would produce nothing. Sometimes I can yearn for harvest time, that is, the time when I’ll be so permeated by the study of nature that I myself will create something in a painting, yet analyzing things isn’t a burden to me or something I dislike doing. It’s already late — I sleep so badly at present — but it’s that wonderful nature of autumn that’s on my mind, and the worry about getting something out of it.  However, I wish I could get some sleep now and then, and do my best, for it makes me nervous, but nothing helps.  But how are things with you? I do hope you don’t have too many worries, because that doesn’t help really. I believe that I would soon be miserable if I didn’t have so much fresh air and enjoyed painting less. But being outdoors and working on something that stimulates are things that renew and sustain one’s strength. It’s only at times when I’m overtired that I feel thoroughly wretched, yet as to my health, I believe I’ll recover.  Adieu, accept a handshake in thought, and write and tell me what I should do — send you a painted study, or not yet. And rest assured that I think of you every day, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Monday morning. My dear Theo, Your latest letter with the enclosure reached me in good order, and I thank you right heartily for it. I was and even still am in a bit of a spot — that is, with a view to painting. There are all kinds of costs involved.  But that’s also partly because many of the things that I begin don’t come off, and then one has to start again and the effort comes to nothing, except that this is the way to make progress, and that one must persevere.  There was no answer in your last letter to what I said about sending or not sending painted studies. Perhaps it slipped your mind. Now, I decided that it wasn’t a weighty matter after all, and so today I’ve sent you a painted study by post. But, as I said in my last letter, I would of course rather you could see them all together sometime, and it goes without saying that you mustn’t judge the future by this one, since I haven’t been working with the brush long enough for me not to change a great deal. I wanted to send you a different one, but the others I would rather have sent aren’t yet dry enough for me to risk rolling them up.  Like me, you will no doubt have reservations about the background in particular. The only explanation I can offer about this is that the study was done as a study of the foreground, namely the tree roots; a lot of work had already gone into them, and as usual I wasn’t sitting peacefully because of passers-by, and so when I had got the study to the point you see I couldn’t bear it any more. 
   You can’t imagine how wearying and irritating it is that people always gather round so close. It makes me so nervous sometimes that I have to give up. Just yesterday morning, although it was very early and I hoped to be spared, a study of the chestnut trees on Bezuidenhout3 (which are so splendid now) was a failure because of it. And sometimes they’re so nasty and insolent. Oh well. But it’s not just the regrets that one has — there’s also the cost of the paint, etc., which can’t be recovered. Of course things like that won’t get on top of me, and I’ll fight my way through them just as others do, but I do so feel that I could reach my goal much faster if there were fewer of these petty vexations.  Now, as regards this study — if it’s the case that, on seeing it and knowing that I have many others as well as this one, you don’t regret enabling me to make it, then I’ll be content and shall carry on in good heart. If you’re disappointed, remember that I started only a short time ago; if you’re pleased, so much the better for me, for I would so much like to be able in time to send you something that gave you pleasure.  Now I must tell you that I had a very unexpected and very pleasing visit from Pa, who came to my house and to the studio, which I believe is infinitely better than his only hearing about me through reports from others.  If people visit me, then at least their impression is original, but I don’t like opinions based on what people say.  It really gave me great pleasure to see Pa and talk to him. I’ve again heard a lot about Nuenen — that churchyard there with the old crosses won’t leave me alone, I do so hope that in time I’ll get round to doing it.
   I also heard a lot about your visit, and that you had given them that engraving after Israëls, which touched them deeply. I wanted to enclose a seascape with this, but the latest7 isn’t yet dry — I could send the first, but since then I’ve caught the colour of the sea better, and so I’m waiting until a later one9 is thoroughly dry. Recently, though, I’ve painted considerably more than in the original plan we discussed. But perhaps it’s necessary to continue doing this if it’s at all possible.  I received a letter from Rappard the other day. I wish he lived a little closer.  And rest assured that I’m truly glad to hear your comments, just as they come into your mind. I often feel a desire and need to seek advice from someone on various questions, but after what happened with Mauve I don’t give in to that, and I don’t discuss my work with painters. However brilliant someone may be, what good is it to me if he argues differently from the way he works? I would rather M. had spoken to me about the use of body-colour11 instead of saying: ‘Above all, you mustn’t use body-colour’, while he himself and all the others, so to speak, nearly always use it, and to the best effect. Well, in many cases one can gradually find out things by looking for oneself as well, and I’m doing that as best I can. 
   Yes — if it were so that I could do exactly what I wanted, I would take up painting on a somewhat larger scale and, above all, work much more with a model. I draw many figures in my spare moments. The small figure in this study is actually there simply and solely for the size, so that if I do use the study I can find the proportion of any figure, more or less.  Of course, a proper figure is a very different matter and involves a great deal more.  It’s also there to provide an accent. Make no mistake, old chap, I send you this because, since you said nothing about it, I didn’t know what to do. Of course I intend something very different from this, and I’m sending it in the same way that I make a scratch sometimes, to give you an idea of what I’m working on. Adieu, accept a handshake in thought. I hope that all is as well with you as possible, and that your headache isn’t something that lasts or keeps coming back. I have it too sometimes, more as a sense of unpleasant dullness than severe pain. Pa and I went for a walk on Rijswijkseweg, it’s lovely there too. Well, regards again, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent If this arrives safely, then this is an easy way of sending you things occasionally. I don’t know whether one can send drawings or paintings by post as printed matter.  Another thing, you understand that I could do some things differently, for example some branches &c., if I painted them again — but I think that one shouldn’t tinker with studies if they’re to be of any use. They should be hung up in the studio just as they come out of the woods. For some they may be less pleasing, but there’s more of his impression in them for the painter himself.  My dear Theo, Just a word to say that your letter arrived in good order, I thank you heartily for the contents. These last few days I’ve done almost nothing but watercolours. A scratch of a large one is enclosed. You may remember Mooijman’s state lottery office at the beginning of Spuistraat. I passed it one rainy morning when a throng of people were standing there waiting to get lottery tickets. For the most part they were old women and the sort of people of whom it’s impossible to say what they do or how they live, but who evidently potter along and fret and get on with life. Of course, viewed superficially, a crowd of folk who evidently attach so much importance to ‘Draw today’3 is something that almost makes you and me laugh, because we’re not in the least bit interested in the lottery.  But the group of people — and their waiting expression — struck me, and it took on a larger, deeper meaning for me while I was working on it than in the first moment. It becomes more meaningful, I believe, if one thinks of it as the poor and money. That, in fact, applies to nearly all figure groups: one occasionally has to think about them for a while before one understands what one is seeing. The curiosity and delusion about the lottery seem more or less childish to us, but it becomes serious when one thinks about the other side: misery and forlorn attempts by these poor souls to be saved, so they think, by buying a lottery ticket, paid for with pennies saved by going without food. 
   Be that as it may, I’m working on a large watercolour of it.  I’m also working on one of a church pew4 that I saw in a small church in the Geest district where the almsmen go5 (they’re known here very expressively as ORPHAN men and orphan women). The way things are going, being busily drawing again, I sometimes think there’s nothing so pleasant as drawing.   and white sideboards. 
    
   I did this scratch half in the dark, but perhaps it can give you an idea of the composition. Once it has been put together, something like this can be quickly scribbled down. Putting it together was less easy, and I don’t claim that it stands now as I wanted to have it. I would enjoy painting it with figures the length of roughly one foot, or slightly less, with the composition then a little broader.  However, I don’t know whether I’ll do it. I’d need a large canvas, and if it didn’t work there might be considerable costs involved. I also think — although I would greatly enjoy it — that I’ll come to things like that of my own accord, by continuing to do types of figures. Then later it will come naturally from the studies from the model, either in this or another form, but with the same sentiment.  I’m becoming more and more aware of how useful and very necessary it is to keep studies from the model. Though they have less value for others, the person who has made them recognizes the model in them, and things are brought vividly to mind again. When there’s an opportunity, remember to send some of the old studies back to me. I hope in time to use them to make more beautiful things. It goes without saying that there were wonderful colours in the group of figures of which I’m sending you a black scratch — blue smocks and brown jackets, white, black, yellowish worker’s trousers, faded shawls, an overcoat turned greenish, white caps and black top hats, muddy paving-stones and boots contrasting with pale faces or ones weathered by the elements. And that’s where painting or watercolouring comes in. Well, I’m toiling away at it. I count on you to write again, of course, but thank you again for sending the money in good time, which is badly needed if I’m to carry on vigorously. Adieu, old chap, accept a hearty handshake in thought, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent There’s a little more foreground in the watercolour — here the figures are too far forward and one’s eye doesn’t grasp the foreground enough. Sunday. My dear Theo, Here’s a scratch of a larger watercolour. I’ve also started another one with many more figures — the last visitors to the seaside — an evening effect. I don’t know whether I’ll be able to get them to a high enough standard, but we must do what we can and struggle on until we get there. Then, the large one of which I sent you a scratch in my last letter is coming along well.  I definitely think that you’d be pleased by what I’m working on. Like me, you would also see immediately that I need a mass of figure studies. I’m putting all my efforts into that, and working almost every day with a model.  I’ve done more of the orphan man since, and this week I hope to get a woman from the home as well.  I’m desperately short of money, though. So many things are needed, I still even owe Stam a little.  Imagine, this week to my great surprise I received a package from home — with a winter coat, warm trousers, and a warm lady’s coat. I was very touched. The churchyard with the wooden crosses is often on my mind, so I may do some studies for it in advance – I would like to do something like that in the snow – a peasant funeral or the like. In short, an effect like the enclosed scratch of miners.
   Just to complete the seasons, I’m sending a scratch of spring8 and one of autumn with it, which I thought of while making the first.  How beautiful it is outdoors — I’m doing my best to capture autumnal effects. I’m writing to you in great haste, I assure you that there’s a lot involved in compositions with figures, and I’m very busy. It’s like weaving: you have to give it all your attention to keep the threads apart; you must control and keep an eye on several things at once.  The small drawing of the beach is more finished than the others because it was used to determine the size, while the others are less watercolour. Well, I sincerely hope your pockets aren’t too empty — it’s so very beautiful these days that I must get something of it on paper.  Adieu, and write as soon as you can, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, Your letter and the contents, both written and monetary, gave me not a little pleasure and I do thank you for them. Regarding the first, I was especially glad to hear that it needn’t be very long before you come to Holland again. As soon as it’s possible for you to determine whether it will be before or after the New Year, I’d very much like to know that, roughly, in advance. I’m very glad that you’ve sent the studies2 — I feel so strongly these days while working on many new ones that I must keep the work from the model together. How delightful it would be if I could consult you more often about the work — but we’re too far apart.  The other day I saw, and also have in my collection, a large woodcut after a painting by Roll, A miners’ strike. Do you happen to know this painter and, if so, what have you seen by him? This shows the yard of a coal-mine, in front of which there’s a large group of men, women and children who have evidently stormed the building. They stand or sit around an overturned cart, and are held back by mounted police. One chap throws a stone, but a woman tries to grab his arm. The characters are outstanding, and it’s roughly and boldly drawn, and certainly painted in that way too, entirely as befits the nature of the subject. It’s not like Knaus or Vautier, but done, as it were, with greater passion — almost no details, everything massed together and simplified — but there’s plenty of style in it. There’s a great deal of expression and mood and sentiment in it, and the movements of the figures — the different actions — are masterfully depicted. I was very struck by it, and so was Rappard, to whom I sent one too. It was in L’Illustration, but an old issue.  As it happens, I have another one by an English draughtsman, Emslie, in which the subject is men going into the mine to help the casualties of an accident if possible, while the women stand and wait. For the rest, such subjects are rarely treated. As for the one by Roll, I myself was present at such a scene in all its vivid reality. What I find so good in his painting is that as a whole it depicts such a situation so truly, even though one finds few of the details. It reminded me of a remark by Corot — ‘There are paintings in which there is nothing and yet everything is there.’7 In the whole thing there’s something grand and classical as in a fine history painting8 — in the composition and the lines, and that’s a quality which is just as rare today as it always has been and will remain. 
   It reminds me a little of Géricault, namely the Raft of the Medusa, and yet at the same time of Munkácsy, for example. This week I’ve drawn some large heads and some figures of children as well as orphan men. I agree with what you say about the small drawings12 — namely, that the one of the bench13 is done more in the old-fashioned way. Yet I did that more or less deliberately, and may well do it more. However strikingly beautiful I find many paintings and drawings clearly done with an eye to the subtly grey, harmonious colour and to the local tone, I believe nonetheless that many artists who worked less definitely to that end, and are now seen as old-fashioned, will always remain fresh and green because their approach had its raison d’être too and still does. To tell you the truth, I wouldn’t like to be without either the old-fashioned or the newer attitude. There are too many excellent things in both schools for me to be able to give preference systematically to one or the other. And the changes introduced in art by the new people aren’t improvements in every respect, it isn’t all progress, neither in the work nor in the persons of the artists, and it often seems to me that many lose sight of both their starting-point and their target, or in other words don’t stand firm. Your description of that evening effect was again very beautiful. Today it looks very different here, but it’s beautiful too in its way, the Rijnspoor yards, for example. In the foreground the cinder road with the poplars that are starting to lose their leaves — then the ditch or canal full of duckweed, with a high bank with withered grass and bulrushes growing on it, then the grey or brown-grey earth of dug-over potato fields or patches planted with greenish purple red cabbage — here and there a really very fresh green of autumn weeds newly shot up, and above them beanpoles with wilting stalks and the reddish or green beanpods — beyond this strip of land the red rusted and black rails in yellow sand — here and there piles of old wood — mountains of coal, disused wagons — above them on the right several roofs and the goods depot — to the left a view of extensive, damp green meadows, cut off at the horizon far away 
   by a grey band in which trees, red roofs and black factory chimneys can be made out. Over it a slightly yellow but still grey sky, very chilly and wintery, which hangs down low and from which a sort of drizzle comes in waves and in which many hungry crows fly. Yet a good deal of light falls on everything, which is especially evident when a few figures in blue or white smocks potter about in the yards, when their shoulders and heads catch the light. However, I imagine that it looks considerably brighter and less chilly in Paris. For the chillness gets into the house, and when you light a pipe there’s something of the drizzle in it, as it were. But it’s very beautiful.  But on such days it would be nice to look up a friend or to be in the company of one, and on such days one sometimes has an empty feeling if one can’t go anywhere and nobody comes.  Yet it’s precisely then that I feel what the work is; how, regardless of approval or disapproval, it gives tone to life, and how on days when one would otherwise feel melancholy one is glad to have a will.  I had a model for a few hours, today a boy with a spade, a builder’s labourer by trade. A very genuine type, flat nose, thick lips, very straight, coarse hair — and yet, when he does something there’s grace in the figure, or rather expression at any rate, and character. I think I’ll get more good models this winter. The boss of the yard has promised to send me the labourers who come to ask for work, as regularly happens now and then in the slack time. I like to give them half a guilder for an afternoon or morning, because that’s just what I need. I see no other way than to work with models. One very definitely shouldn’t snuff out one’s power of imagination, but it’s precisely the constant looking at nature and the struggle with it that sharpens the power of imagination and makes it more accurate.  Next Sunday I hope to get the same boy again. I then want to draw him the way they are when they pull the barges with bricks, which is a common sight on the canal here. 
   Going out of doors to work is all over now — you have to do that sitting still, and it’s too raw — so we must move into winter quarters.  The way I feel, I’m looking forward to the winter, it’s a marvellous season if you can work regularly. I hope that it’ll make more headway.  I don’t need to tell you that I sincerely hope you’ll receive the you know what. As you know, I’ve carried on longer with painting and watercolouring than first planned, and now I must scrimp and save. But we’ll get through that, and even more it can be no reason to slacken off. I’m varying it now by working a good deal with models, though that also mounts up — but I’m filling my portfolios as I empty my wallet. Should you not have all of the normal sum towards the twentieth then send a part, but I would prefer to receive it a day earlier rather than later, since it works out that on that day I have to pay the rent for the week.  I’m still pleased with the house, except that one wall is very damp. Working with a model can be done much better here than in the other studio — I can even work with more than one person at a time, for example two children under an umbrella, two women who stand talking, a man and a woman arm in arm, &c.  But how little spring and summer we’ve had here. It sometimes seems to me as if there has been nothing in between, between last autumn and this one now, but that may be because the time in between was when I was ill. By the way, I feel normal again now, except when I’m very tired, then I sometimes have a day or half a day when I’m indescribably faint and weak, much more so than in the past. But I no longer let it disturb me, for it annoys me too much and is too inconvenient, since there’s too much to do. It often helps, for example, if I take a brisk walk to Scheveningen, or something like that.  Well, do write again towards the twentieth. This time I’ve had to get in Whatman again and brushes. You can’t imagine how many things one needs sometimes. Well, that goes for every painter. In thought a handshake, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Sunday afternoon My dear Theo, Your letter and the enclosure gave me very great pleasure, I don’t need to tell you that. It’s just what was needed and is a mighty help to me.  It’s still autumnal weather here — rainy and chilly, but full of atmosphere — especially good for figures, which show a range of tones on the wet streets and roads in which the sky is reflected. It’s what Mauve, above all, does so beautifully time and again. As a result I’ve been able to do some more to the large watercolour of the crowd of people in front of the lottery office, and I’ve also just started another of the beach, of which this is the composition.  I can agree entirely with what you say about times one occasionally has when one seems to be deadened to the things of nature, or when nature no longer seems to speak to us.  I, too, often have that, and sometimes it helps if I turn to something very different. If I’m dead to landscape or effects of light, I tackle figures, and vice versa. Sometimes there’s nothing to be done except wait for it to pass, but on many occasions I manage to get rid of the unresponsiveness by changing the subjects I’m concentrating on. I’m becoming more and more fascinated by figures though. I remember having had a time in the past when the feeling for landscape was very strong within me, and I was much more struck by a painting or drawing in which a light effect or the mood of a landscape was well expressed than by figures. In general, the figure painters even inspired in me a kind of fairly cool respect rather than warm sympathy. However, I well remember being particularly struck at the time by a drawing by Daumier, an old man under the chestnut trees in the Champs Elysées (an illustration for Balzac), although the drawing wasn’t that important. But I remember that it struck me so forcefully that there was something so firm and manly in Daumier’s approach that I thought: it must be good to feel and think like that and overlook or ignore a mass of things so as to concentrate on something that’s thought-provoking and appeals to a human being as a human being more directly than meadows or clouds. 
   And similarly the figures of either the English draughtsmen or the English writers, on account of their Monday morning-like sobriety and deliberate austerity and prose and analysis, continue to attract me as something solid and firm which gives one something to hold onto on days when one is feeling weak. And those of Balzac and Zola among the French writers just as much. As yet I don’t know the books by Murger you write about, but I hope to become acquainted with them. Did I write to you before that I read Daudet’s Les rois en exil? I thought it rather beautiful.  The titles of those books sound very attractive, La bohème among others. How far we have strayed in our age from la bohème of Gavarni’s day!8 It seems to me that things were a little warmer then, and more good-humoured and livelier than now. But I don’t know, and there’s also much that’s good in the present, or would be more than is actually the case if there were rather more joining together. At the moment a wonderful effect can be seen from the window of my studio. The city with its towers and roofs and smoking chimneys stands out as a dark, sombre silhouette against a horizon of light. The light, though, is only a broad strip; above it hangs a heavy shower, more concentrated below, above torn by the autumn wind into great tufts and clumps that float off. But that strip of light makes the wet roofs glisten here and there in the sombre mass of the city (in a drawing you would lift it with a stroke of body-colour), and ensures that, although the mass all has the same tone, you can still distinguish between red tiles and slates.  Schenkweg runs through the foreground as a glistening line through the wet, the poplars have yellow leaves, the banks of the ditch and the meadow are deep green, figures are black.  I would draw it, or rather try to draw it, if I hadn’t spent the whole afternoon toiling at figures of peat carriers9 which are still too much in my mind for there to be room for something new, and must remain there. 
   I do so often long for you and think of you so much. What you write about some characters in Paris, about artists who live with women, are less petty-minded than others perhaps, try desperately to stay young, seems well observed to me. Such people exist there and here. It’s perhaps even more difficult there than here for a person to keep some freshness in domestic life, because that’s almost more of an uphill struggle there. How many have become desperate in Paris — calmly, rationally, logically and rightly desperate? I read something along these lines about Tassaert, among others, whom I like very much, and was pained by what happened to him.  All the more, all the more, I think every attempt in this direction is worthy of respect. I also believe that it may happen that one succeeds and one mustn’t begin by despairing; even if one loses here and there, and even if one sometimes feels a sort of decline, the point is nevertheless to revive and have courage, even though things don’t turn out as one first thought. Moreover, don’t think that I look with contempt on people such as you describe because their life isn’t founded on serious and well-considered principles. My view on this is as follows: the result must be an action, not an abstract idea. I think principles are good and worth the effort only when they develop into deeds, and I think it’s good to reflect and to try to be conscientious, because that makes a person’s will to work more resolute and turns the various actions into a whole. I think that people such as you describe would get more steadiness if they went about what they do more rationally, but otherwise I much prefer them to people who make a great show of their principles without making the slightest effort to put them into practice or even giving that a thought. For the latter have no use for the finest of principles, and the former are precisely the people who, if they ever get round to living with willpower and reflection, will do something great. For the great doesn’t happen through impulse alone, and is a succession of little things that are brought together. 
   What is drawing? How does one get there? It’s working one’s way through an invisible iron wall that seems to stand between what one feels and what one can do. How can one get through that wall? — since hammering on it doesn’t help at all. In my view, one must undermine the wall and grind through it slowly and patiently. And behold, how can one remain dedicated to such a task without allowing oneself to be lured from it or distracted, unless one reflects and organizes one’s life according to principles? And it’s the same with other things as it is with artistic matters. And the great isn’t something accidental; it must be willed. Whether originally deeds lead to principles in a person or principles lead to deeds is something that seems to me as unanswerable and as little worth answering as the question of which came first, the chicken or the egg. But I believe it’s a positive thing and of great importance that one should try to develop one’s powers of thought and will.  I’m very curious about what you’ll think of the figures I’m doing at present, when you see them sooner or later. It’s the same with them as with the question of the chicken and the egg: should one make figures for a composition one has done first, or combine the figures made separately so that the composition flows from them? I believe it comes down to the same thing. Just as long as one works. I end with that with which you close your letter — that we have in common a liking for seeing behind the scenes or, in other words, are inclined to analyze things. Now this, I believe, is exactly the quality one must have in order to paint — one must exercise this power when painting or drawing. It may be that there has to be something innate in us, to some extent (but that too you have, and so do I — for that we may have to thank our childhood in Brabant and a background that helped, much more than is usually the case, to teach us to think), but above all, above all, it’s only later that the artistic sense develops and ripens through working. How you might become a very good painter I don’t know, but I certainly believe that it is in you and will come out.  Adieu, old chap, thanks for what you sent, and a hearty handshake.  Ever yours, Vincent I have the stove in place already13 — old chap, how I wish we could look at drawings and sketches for an evening sometime — and woodcuts. I have some more splendid ones.  This week I hope to have orphan boys to pose, then I may be able to rescue the drawing of orphan children14 after all. My dear Theo, It’s Sunday again, and again as rainy as usual. On top of that we’ve had a gale this week and the leaves are thinning out on the trees. Believe me, I’m glad that the stove is in place. This morning, when I at last got round to sorting out my drawings, namely the studies from the model done since about the time of your visit (not counting the older studies nor what I draw in my sketchbook), I found about one hundred. I just mention this figure because I remember that on the occasion of your visit you asked me if I had other studies as well as the drawings you saw then. I don’t know whether all painters work harder than I do, even those who look down on my work very loftily, so much so that they consider it beneath them to take the slightest notice of it. Nor do I know whether they know a better way than working with models, although in my view they do that too little, as I’ve written to you more than once, saying that I couldn’t understand why they don’t make more use of models. (Of course I do not mean people like Mauve or Israëls, although the latter sets an excellent example in my view by always working with a model, but more gentlemen like Bock and Breitner, say.) I haven’t seen anything at all of the latter since I visited him in hospital when he was ill2 — by chance I heard something about his having become a teacher at a secondary school3 — but I haven’t had the slightest sign of life from him himself. 
   This week I received a letter from Rappard, who’s also surprised by the behaviour of many painters here, and had the experience, among other things, of having one of his paintings refused at Arti. I say only this: if the likes of he and I are rated as nothing, is that fair? For I assure you that he works hard; he was in Drenthe this summer, and after that he worked for a long time in the hospital for the blind in Utrecht.  I found it curious to hear from him of several experiences that were roughly or exactly the same as my own. But anyway.  As I’ve written to you before, I often long for you. If I saw more of you and we were able to discuss the work more, I could make several things that should be possible to make from the studies I have. I’m convinced of that. Still — you remember that not long ago I wrote (when I sent you a small scratch of a potato market): ‘I must have another go at tackling that bustle on the street’. The result is now some 12 watercolours that I’m working on at the moment. So I do not mean by the above that I can’t achieve anything with my studies or that I do them without any aim, but only that I believe I could achieve more with them and make them more immediately effective if I could discuss things with you more often. 
   But be that as it may, I do work with great pleasure these days, and I do have hope that there will be some things which you too will take pleasure in, when you next come.  I believe that if one wants to do figures one must have a warm sense within oneself of what Punch in the Christmas illustration calls Good will to all, that is, that one must have a real love of people. At least I hope to do my best to be in that kind of a mood as much as possible.  That’s exactly why I find it such a pity that I don’t get on better with painters, and, as I wrote to you in the past, that on a rainy day like today one can’t just sit cosily by the stove, look at drawings or prints and liven each other up that way. I must ask you whether there are cheap prints by Daumier for sale, and if so, which. I’ve always believed him to be highly gifted, but it’s only recently that I begin to suspect that he’s of even greater importance than I thought. If you know anything special about him, or know of important things among his drawings, do write about them if you will. In the past I saw caricatures by him, and perhaps because of them got an idea about him that wasn’t the right one. His figures always struck me the most, but I believe that I know only a very small part of his work and that, for instance, the caricatures are definitely not his most typical or main work. 
   I remember that we talked about this last year on the road to Princenhage, and you said then that you thought Daumier more beautiful than Gavarni, and I took Gavarni’s side and spoke to you of the book about Gavarni that I had read and that you now have. But I must say that, although I still like Gavarni just as much, I begin to suspect that I know only a very small part of Daumier’s work AND THAT IN THE PART OF HIS WORK I DO NOT KNOW are the very things that would interest me most of all (however much I already appreciate what I know by him). And I also dimly remember — but I may be wrong — you telling me about large drawings, types or portraits from the common people, and I’m curious about them. If there were more things by him as beautiful as a print by him I recently found, The 5 ages of a drinker, or as that figure of an old man under a chestnut tree I told you about before, well, then he was perhaps the master of them all. Can you give me any information about this? Do you still remember the figures by Degroux from the Uylenspiegel that I had in the past but not any more, alas? — well, those two prints by Daumier that I just mentioned look like them —and if you know of any more like them — (I care much less about the caricatures) that’s what I’m after. I’m terribly sorry that I no longer have the Degroux and Rops. I gave them away in England, along with other things, to Richardson, the traveller for the house of G&Cie. Well, old chap, and I promise you this for when you come, apart from the watercolours and painted studies, I’ll ask you to take the trouble to look through a portfolio with one hundred drawn studies — all figures. I have them already, especially if I include some old ones. In the interval between now and your visit, however, I’ll try to make better ones to replace others that can be left out, and try to put even more variety into them. Adieu in the meantime, I sincerely wish you good fortune and happiness, and believe me, with a handshake in thought, Ever yours, Vincent 1 Nov. My dear Theo, For several days I’ve been completely taken up by something that may also be of interest to you and I think it well worth writing to you about it especially. In a letter from Rappard I received an extract from a lecture by Herkomer on the subject of the wood engravings of recent times. I can’t tell you about the whole thing in detail, you may have read the article yourself (which was in an English art magazine, perhaps the Art Journal). It was mainly about the drawings in The Graphic. Herkomer relates how he himself worked on them with great ambition and enthusiasm, and he particularly recalls the splendid prints in the first volumes. Feels that no words can express sufficiently forcefully how important he finds the work of those first artists. He reviews the progress made in process and technique, the difference between the old and the modern wood engraving, &c. &c. Then talks about the present day, and that brings him to the real subject of his lecture. He says: the wood engravers are cleverer than ever, but nonetheless I see a decadence if I think back to when The Graphic began. And — he goes on — in my view the reason lies in two things against which I protest. One has to do with the publishers, the other with the artists. 
   Both have their faults, which will ruin things if one doesn’t combat them. The publishers, he says, demand things done for effect: ‘correct and honest drawing is no longer wanted, complete designs are no longer in request, a “bit” just covering an awkward corner of a page, is all that is required’.  ‘The managers declare that the public require the representation of a public event or so and are satisfied if it is correct and entertaining, caring nothing for the artistic qualities of the work. I do not believe what they say. The only excuse you may accept is “dearth of good draughtsmen”’. Then6 he comes to the artists, and says that he regrets that these days all too often it’s the wood engraver, not the draughtsman, who makes the prints beautiful. Urges the artists not to accept this — to draw soberly and forcefully so that the engraver remains what he should be, the translator of the draughtsman’s work, and doesn’t get the upper hand. Then comes his conclusion, a forceful plea to all to continue supporting the cause warmly, and not to allow any weakening. There’s something of a reproach in his plea, and it isn’t without some melancholy that he speaks, and as one fighting against the indifference he finds intolerable. ‘To you — the public — the art offers infinite pleasure and edification. For you it is really done. Therefore clamour loudly for good work and be sure it will be forthcoming’ — are his closing words.
   The whole thing is thoroughly sound, firm, honest. His manner of speaking makes the same impression on me as some letters by Millet.  It gives me encouragement, and it truly does me good to hear someone talk like that for once.  I say that it’s a terrible pity that here there’s no enthusiasm, so to speak, for the art that’s most suitable for the common people.  If the painters were to close ranks to ensure that their work (which, after all, is made for the people, in my view — at least I believe that is the highest, noblest vocation for any artist) could also come into the hands of the people and was put within everyone’s reach, that would be something that would produce the same results as were produced in the first years of The Graphic.  Neuhuys, Van der Velden and a few others made drawings this year for ‘De Zwaluw’, a magazine that appears monthly and costs 7 1/2 cents. There are some good ones, but one can see that most were done with a weak hand (not the original drawings but the way of popularizing them), and from what I hear the magazine is no more likely to keep going than its predecessors. Why doesn’t it work? — the booksellers say they earn nothing from it, and instead of circulating it they block it.  And as for the painters, I believe they haven’t yet made every effort to take the matter to heart. The definition that many a painter here in Holland gives in reply to the question ‘What is a wood engraving?’ is: ‘it’s those things lying in the Zuid-Hollandsch Koffiehuis’. So they rank them among the drinks. And the makers of them among the drunks, perhaps. 
   And what do the dealers say? Suppose I went to anyone here with around 100 sketches that I’ve gathered together. At best I fear I would be told ‘did you imagine those things had commercial value?’ My love and respect for the great draughtsmen of both the age of Gavarni and of the present day increases the better acquainted with their work I become, and above all as I do my best myself to make something from what one sees every day on the streets. What I value in Herkomer, in Fildes, in Holl and the other founders of The Graphic, why I find and will continue to find them even more sympathetic than Gavarni and Daumier, is that, while the latter seem to view society more with mockery, the former, like such men as Millet, Breton, Degroux and Israëls, choose subjects which — while as true as those of Gav. or Daum. — have something noble and in which there’s a more serious sentiment. That, above all, must remain, it seems to me.  An artist need not be a minister or a collector in church, but he must have a warm heart for people, and I find it a noble thing that, for example, no winter passed without The Graphic doing something to keep alive sympathy for the poor. For instance, I have a print by Woodville showing the distribution of turf tickets in Ireland, another by Staniland entitled Help the helpers depicting various scenes in a hospital — where money was short, Christmas in the workhouse by Herkomer, Homeless and hungry by Fildes14 &c. I find them even more beautiful than the drawings by Bertall or somebody for the Vie Elégante or other élégances. Perhaps you’ll find this a tedious letter — but everything was once more fresh in my mind. I had gathered together and mounted my 100 or so studies and when I had finished the job a slightly melancholy sense of ‘what’s the good?’ came over me — but then Herkomer’s forceful words calling on people not to weaken and saying that it’s more necessary than ever to keep the hand to the plough16 did me so much good, and I thought I’d briefly tell you the substance of what he said. With a handshake in thought, believe me Ever yours, Vincent I hope to hear from you in the coming days, I received a good letter from home.  My dear Theo, Your letter and its contents were very welcome. A point that will perhaps be raised more and more is the one you refer to. People will be forced to recognize that much of what’s new, in which people at first thought they saw progress, is indeed less sound than the old, and consequently the need will become apparent for strong men to redress the balance. Since I believe arguing about this will make no difference to the matter itself, I think it quite unnecessary to write more about it. But for my part I can hardly say that I share your idea that you express as follows: ‘in my view it’s in the nature of things that the desired change will come’. Just think of how many great men have died or... won’t be with us much longer — Millet, Brion, Troyon, Rousseau, Daubigny, Corot — and a host of others — are no more. Think further back, I say, Leys, Gavarni, Degroux (to name just a few), or still further, Ingres, Delacroix, Géricault, think how old it already is, modern art. Add to them many who are aged.  Nonetheless, there was still progress up to Millet and Jules Breton in my view, but as for surpassing these two men, don’t talk to me of that.  Their genius may be equalled in past, present or later ages, but to surpass them isn’t possible. If one reaches that high zone, one is amid an equality of geniuses, but one can’t climb higher than the top of the mountain. Israëls, for example, may equal Millet, but with genius there’s no question of surpassing or being inferior.  Now, though, the top has been reached in art. In the years to come we’ll most certainly see splendid things; something more sublime than what we’ve already seen — no. And for my part I fear that in a few years there may be a kind of panic, in this form: since Millet we have sunk very low — the word decadence, now whispered or pronounced in veiled terms (see Herkomer), will then sound like an alarm bell. Many, like I myself, now keep quiet, because they already have the reputation of being awkward customers, and talking about it doesn’t help. That — namely, talking — isn’t what one needs to do — one must work, though with sorrow in the heart. Those who later cry out the loudest about decadence will themselves belong to it the most. I repeat: by this shall ye know them, by their work, and it won’t be the most eloquent who say the truest things. See Millet himself, see Herkomer, they’re certainly not orators, and speak almost reluctantly. 
   Enough of this, in you I find someone who understands much about the great men, and I find it delightful to hear things about them now and then that I don’t know, like, for example, what you write to me about Daumier. The series of portraits of politicians &c., the painting of the 3rd-class carriage, the Revolution — I don’t know any of them. Now I haven’t seen them myself through what you say, but in my imagination Daumier’s personality has gained in importance as a result. I would rather hear talk about such men than about the latest Salon, for example.  Now as for what you write about Vie Moderne, or rather about a type of paper that Buhot promised you. This is something that interests me very much.  Do I understand correctly that this paper is such that when one does a drawing on it (I assume in autographic ink), this drawing — without using a second draughtsman or engraver or lithographer as an intermediary — can be transferred as it is onto a stone, or that a print can be made of it, so that any number of impressions can be obtained, the latter then being facsimiles of the original drawing? If this is the case, be so good as to give me all the information you can find about how one should work on this paper, and do your best to send me some of it on which I can do some trials.  If I could do my trials before you come, then we could discuss what to do with them at that time. I think it possible that within a relatively short time there may be a demand for employees for illustration, more so than at present.  If for my part I fill my portfolios with studies from the models that I can grab or catch, I’ll get something to show so that 
   I’ll be eligible, I hope, to be given employment. To keep on illustrating, like for example Morin, Lançon, Renouard, Jules Ferat, Worms in their day, one must have plenty of ammunition in the form of various studies in different fields.  I’m trying to gather these together, as you know, and will see in due course.  By the way, so far I have not yet received the packet of studies which you wrote that you had returned through rue Chaptal. Could they already have arrived at the Plaats? If you think they have, I’ll have them collected, because they’ll be useful to me in connection with things I’ve been doing recently.  Do you know who I drew this morning? Blok the Jewish bookseller, not David but the short one who’s on the Binnenhof. I wish I had more from that family, for they are a true type.  It’s enormously difficult to get the types one would prefer to have — in the meantime I’m content to draw what I can get, without losing sight of the others I would draw if I had the choice.  I’m very pleased with Blok. He reminds me of things from many years ago. I hope he’ll come again some other Sunday morning. Naturally, while working one always feels and ought to feel a sort of dissatisfaction with oneself, a desire to be able to do it much better, but still it’s delightful and enjoyable to gradually assemble all kinds of figures — although the more one makes, the more one realizes one needs.  One can’t do everything at once, but it will be absolutely necessary for me to do a number of horse studies some day, not just scratches on the street but with a model for once. I know of an old white horse, a real nag if ever there was one (at the gasworks), but the man, 
   who makes the poor animal do all manner of heavy jobs and just wants to get what he can out of it, asked a lot for it, namely three guilders to come to me for a morning, a daalder14 at the very least at his place, provided I came on Sunday.  And when you consider that for what I need, namely 30 strong studies, say, I would have to work quite a few mornings, it would cost me too much. But I’ll find a better opportunity sometime. I can get a horse much more easily here and there for a very short time, these people are sometimes willing to do that, but in a very short time one cannot do what really needs to be done, so that’s little help. I try to work quickly, because otherwise it just doesn’t pan out, but a study that’s of some use requires at least half an hour, say, so one always comes back to actual posing. At Scheveningen, for instance, I’ve occasionally had a boy or a man stand still for a moment, as they say, on the beach. The outcome was always a great desire on my part for a longer pose, and standing still for a moment isn’t enough for me, neither for a person nor for a horse.  If I’m correctly informed, the draughtsmen for The Graphic whose turn it was always had models at their disposal in a studio at the offices. Dickens has some nice things to say about the painters of his age and their wrong way of working, namely slavishly and yet only half sticking to the model. He says: Fellows, do understand that your model isn’t your ultimate goal but a means for giving body and vigour to your ideas and inspiration. Look at the French (Ary Scheffer, for example) and see how much better than you they do it. It’s just as if the English listened to him — they continued working with models, but they learnt to see the model in a grander and bolder way, and learnt to take better advantage of it for sounder and nobler compositions than those of Dickens’s painting contemporaries.  Two things that remain eternally true and complement each other, in my view are: don’t snuff out your inspiration and power of imagination, don’t become a slave to the model; and, the other, take a model and study it, for otherwise your inspiration won’t take on material form. When your letter came there were things I had to pay immediately. I hope it won’t inconvenience you to send again no later than 10 Nov. Understand that the question of that process Buhot spoke to you about strikes me as being pretty important. I would be very pleased if I could learn it, and would like to do my best at it. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours,  Vincent. Do you know the effects one sees here early in the morning these days? It’s splendid — it’s what Brion painted in the painting in the Luxembourg, The end of the flood, namely that band of red light on the horizon with rain-clouds above. This brings me to the landscape painters. Compare those of Brion’s time with now. Is it better now than then? I doubt it. I’ll gladly acknowledge that they’re much more productive in that field than in the past, but although I can’t help admiring what they make now, the old landscapes in a more old-fashioned manner always give me pleasure when I see them. There were a few years when I walked past a Schelfhout, for example, and thought something like: that’s not worth the effort. Yet the new, although it takes someone in, doesn’t always continue to make the same strong, moving impression over time, and a naive painting like a Schelfhout or a Ségé, a Jules Bakhuyzen, is seen again with vivid pleasure after one has long been looking at newer things. I really didn’t deliberately set out to be somewhat disenchanted as regards progress; on the contrary, it began to develop unwittingly in my thoughts very much against my will, because as time passed I felt more and more a kind of emptiness which I can’t18 fill with the things being made today. While searching for an example, I think of old woodcuts by Jacque that I saw at least 10 years ago at C.M.’s. It was a series, The months. They were done in Jacque’s old manner, in the manner of those etchings that appeared in annual series, or even more old-fashioned. The local tone is less in them than in his later work, but the draughtsmanship and a certain terseness are reminiscent of Millet. You see, with the many croquis in the present magazines it seems to me that a not entirely unconventional elegance threatens to replace that typical, truly rustic quality of which the croquis by Jacque that I mean are an example. 
   Might not the cause of this also lie in the lives and characters of the artists? I don’t know what your experience is, but do you find many people these days prepared to go for a long walk in grey weather, for example? You would do it gladly, and enjoy it too, as I would, but for many it would be a chore. Equally, I was struck by the fact that when one talks to painters, in most cases, by far, the conversation is not interesting.  When he wants, Mauve has the power to say something in words so that one sees it, and most certainly others here have that too when they want. Yet, that curious fact that when one talks to a painter one immediately has a sense of the open air — is it your impression that that’s as strong as it used to be?  This week I read in Forster, Life of C. Dickens, all kinds of details about long walks on Hampstead Heath &c. outside London, the final goal being, for example, to have bacon and eggs at an old inn way out in the country. Those walks were very jolly and cheerful, but all the same it was usually the case that serious plans for books were made, or else the changes Dickens was to make to one character or another were discussed. The present has something hectic and harried about it for which I do not care, and it’s just as if death has touched everything. I’d like your expectation ‘that the desired change will come’ to prove true, but in my view it isn’t ‘in the nature of things’.  Be this as it may, opposing in words is a complete side issue, I believe, and what everyone who considers the matter important should do in his own circle is to try to make or help to make something.  Have been working again on women miners carrying sacks of coal in the snow — watercolour. But above all I’ve drawn 12 or so studies of figures22 for it, and 3 heads, and I’m not yet finished. I’ve got the effect in the watercolour, I believe, but it isn’t yet strong enough in character for my taste.  The reality is like Millet’s The gleaners24 — austere — so you will understand that one shouldn’t turn it into a snow effect, which would only be an impression and have no raison d’être unless the landscape is the whole point. I think that I’ll start all over again — although the studies I have for now may please you — precisely because I was more successful with them than with many others. It would be really suitable, I believe, for the Vie Moderne. If I get the paper, I already have one of the figures, for example, to do as a trial. But it must become a little troop of women, a small caravan.  My dear Theo, While waiting for further information about the process, I’ve made a lithograph with the help of Smulders’s printer, and I have the pleasure of sending you the very first impression herewith.  I drew this lithograph on a piece of prepared paper, probably the same type that Buhot told you about. Meanwhile I long to compare the Vie Moderne paper with what I bought from Smulders. It’s very expensive at S., 1. guilders a sheet, but is nice to work with.   As you see, I’ve scrawled this print as simply as possible — I’ll be content if there’s anything in it that brings to mind the old lithographs from the time when there was more zest in this branch of art than now. I can get 100 impressions for about 5 guilders, and can own the stone for a little more. Is this worthwhile, do you think? I would dearly like to make more. For example, a series of some thirty figures. 
   But as for things like printing, I must first know your thoughts. But I think it would be bold if, without involving anyone else, we could show a series of some thirty prints — not laboured but vigorous — that we’d had printed at our own expense, this would make us more credible to the people we’ll have to approach later on, namely the managers of the magazines.  But you see more clearly in business matters than I, and we can talk about this when the opportunity arises.  Above all, give me any information you can get about the process. What should one work on with autographic ink? Can everything drawn in autographic ink be printed? &c.  A model has just arrived — a track-sweeper from Bezuidenhout4 — so with a handshake,  Ever yours, Vincent If at all possible, send no later than the tenth, for I’ve had extra expenses here for one thing and another. 
   I’ll add a few words here. It seems to me that Buhot, for example, will be able to tell you more clearly some useful things about the way it works with this print in front of him. I’d be so pleased if it came off sometime. A hundred times more important to me than the process are the drawings themselves. I work as much with models as my purse allows, for you understand that one must have ammunition in the form of studies if eventually, once one has started illustrating, one wants to keep it up. And from that more important things also develop.  So I can’t say this too often: it’s more important that I build up a stock of drawings than that I rush or chivvy myself to find employment, although it would be most welcome.  But nothing is lost if they’re not immediately accepted, and I believe that later, with more drawings in stock, I may get a better result.  Also because it wouldn’t surprise me if the demand for draughtsmen becomes ever more evident. I’m so sorry that I didn’t learn about this process earlier. When I was in Brussels I tried to be taken on by the lithographers there, but all of them sent me away. I asked for different work from this there, and I just wanted to see, and above all to learn, something of lithography. But they didn’t need anyone like that. Simonau and Toovey6 were the least dismissive, they said they’d had little benefit from young fellows they’d wanted to train, and things were so slack that they had enough staff. I talked to them about the prints by Degroux and Rops and they said, yes, but these days there weren’t any draughtsmen like them. The impression I got from 
   what I heard there and at other firms was that lithography was rapidly dying out.  This new invention of that paper, however, proves that people seem to want a revival. How much fine work has been done in lithography, Charlet, Raffet, Lemud, as well as the others we talked about recently.  Yesterday evening I looked again at the Gavarnis with renewed pleasure. I hope that you’ll see from this trial that I’m keen to do my best to make something. I wrote to you how I came to make this one, didn’t I? — it was after I told Smulders what you had written about that paper, and he said that he had some left. He seemed rather surprised that I came back with the drawing a few hours after I had bought some from him. Would you also like to have an impression with a bigger margin? I’ve just drawn two diggers. If this format is too big — but I don’t really think it’s too big, given that it’s rather forcefully drawn — I could, especially when I know more about how to rub something out on that paper, reduce the drawings to  1/2  or  1/3  that size without losing accuracy — namely by using grids. Anyway, we would deal with that. At the same time you see in this print one of the studies of which I have more, and which I wrote to you about. Tuesday. My dear Theo A few words to ask whether you received my last letter together with a small roll also sent by post containing a proof of a lithograph. The reason why I can’t help starting to think that they aren’t in your hands but have perhaps been lost, or that your letter has been lost, is that I’ve heard nothing from you since, and moreover today is already 14 Nov. I have been literally without money for 5 or 6 days now, and so my work is stuck too, at least I can’t work as I would like to. I think the probable reason though is that, together with your letter and the money, you wanted to send the information I asked for about the lithographic process and autographic ink, and that you had to wait for that. And hope that it will perhaps be cleared up that way today. But on the other hand I’m always nervous when there’s something like this, and can’t help worrying, and am then afraid that perhaps I wrote or did something of which you disapprove.  So last night I was fretting that perhaps you didn’t approve of my having my lithograph printed, possibly drawing the conclusion from what I wrote that I intended to publish something, for instance. Anyway, I was fretting whether something could be wrong. But there’s probably nothing. Just to be sure, though, I write to say that you mustn’t confuse publishing with experiments in order to learn about a process. The former, that is publications, are things I’d most certainly consult you about before undertaking them, and I have no thought of that for the present, 
   and occupy myself, as you know incidentally, with my drawings and the artistic side of my work only. These experiments I’m doing are definitely part of that, though, and nothing is more natural than that I should work on them. At one point Rappard experimented in the same way with etchings for instance, which he also had to have printed, but the printing an artist does isn’t publishing something, and has nothing directly to do with trade, being strictly private.  This seems to me as clear as daylight but, as I say, last night I was fretting that perhaps you might have seen it as a step of a very different nature, for I found it strange not to have a letter yet.  Well, I hope it will turn out that I needn’t have worried.  I hope, on the contrary, that you’ve been successful with your enquiries about the same matter, i.e. can say something about processes. Last week I did another trial of the figure Sorrow on what I had left of the printing paper. When I said just now that I was concerned regarding my last letter that you might think something that I didn’t intend, the reason is that I remembered saying something like the following:
   I think it would be bold if we were to have a few of these sheets printed at our own expense. That would make us more credible to the managers of the illustrated magazines.  Now it isn’t at all my idea that what we might have printed should be exploited by me or you. I had and have not the slightest thought of that, but only that when one presents oneself somewhere to ask for work it’s as well to be able to show something of one’s work. That saves words and is more practical.  The fact that I consider it not unlikely that in time I’ll make things that will come into the hands of the public is something that leaves me quite cold and that I don’t in the least regard as pleasing. Two reasons would bring me to that: first, if I were employed by an illustrated magazine and would then of course have to make what was required; second, something to consider later, although I do indeed think about this, when sooner or later I have something that forms a whole and has an import and says something, then I might be persuaded to publish it myself if I couldn’t find anyone else, although not without informing or consulting you.  That would probably cost me rather than earn me money — it would be for the sake of art and not firstly or chiefly for my own benefit. If I ever did it, you would know all about it, and in no sense at all — in connection either with the work or with the publication — would that be dishonest, otherwise of course I wouldn’t do it.
   So if (but I don’t think so, although in my nervousness, since I couldn’t think of anything else, the phrase in my letter came to mind), so if there was something that you interpreted as a plan on my part to undertake something like publication, be assured that there is nothing and for the present won’t be anything more than the experiments that all those who etch or lithograph or reproduce their drawings in one way or another must carry out to learn about the processes and the strengths of black and white. Should a certain number of copies of one sheet or another that turns out well be printed by the maker, then that, at least in my case and that of most people who do such a thing, would be purely artistic in character and has not the slightest relation to commercial publications. If I didn’t know from experience that misunderstandings can happen in matters such as showing drawings (and showing printed proofs of them is the same kind of thing), and that this is often regarded as conceitedness, it would never have occurred to me. But I write about this, needlessly no doubt, because of the absence of a letter from you, which, when I think of your loyalty, is probably quite unconnected and will have some other cause. If in my last letter I used the phrase mentioned, you will see my intention more clearly in my drawings when you have an opportunity. They appear — Sorrow among them — much more forceful in print (because of the lithographic crayon) than in the drawing. Yet precisely because they’re sober and kept in the original grey, I need only stick to my study to get the force in the lithograph. And this is something that I ought to be able to point out to people (with whom I might have to deal if an opportunity came up to get work for an illustrated magazine). Now, if you haven’t written yet do so as soon as you receive this, for I’m in rather a tight spot. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter today, for which many thanks. Bitterly sorry as I am that your letter of 9 Nov. and the enclosed banknote have been lost, I was nonetheless glad that it wasn’t for another reason that your letter didn’t come. For I can assure you that I was terribly worried. I immediately reported the loss of the letter at the post office, but they say they can give little hope and that steps for tracing it must come from Paris. In the meantime they would investigate. We hope it’ll turn up but I dare not count on it, and I fear the 50 francs are down the drain, just when they’re almost indispensable — first, for making progress with the experiments in lithography. I’m really delighted that you took some pleasure in the first one I sent. Herewith you’re receiving the very first impression of Sorrow. I’ve also enclosed one with a bigger margin for Heyerdahl and an earlier one for Buhot, but because they’re bigger I don’t know whether the post office will accept them. Of course you can take whichever you like and get more impressions of whichever you like, but I’ve marked the very first ones 1re épreuve. I’m going to go and talk to Smulders tomorrow to get the stones from him. I must tell you that I would find it extremely pleasing if I could get around to making a large series sometime. I’m now working on Diggers — they’re the drawings I hope may amount to something.
   It’s bitterly cold here. Snow and frost, but very beautiful for all that. In the roll of lithographs you’ll find a drawing done in a neutral tint on Whatman. My question about it is this. Would it be possible to reproduce a drawing done in this way? Also, would such drawings or similar ones done in autographic ink be of use to Vie Moderne? I would like to ask you if you could send me some issues of Vie Moderne because I have only a very few (I think 3) prints from it from one now very old issue, and would so much like to have a better and rather more complete idea of what the magazine actually is.  I’ve looked for them here in town and can’t find a single issue. The sooner I receive them the more valuable they’ll be to me, since I’m just now going into the various processes, and the reproductions in Vie Moderne may help me to get a better understanding of what can be done with them. But I ought to ask you to excuse me for all the trouble I put you to.
   Pa was here briefly this week when he was in town for a meeting. Rappard writes to me about a new series of drawings of miners by Paul Renouard in L’Illustration. I haven’t seen them yet, but if you happen to see them in a kiosk somewhere where they sell ‘those things that lie in the Zuid-Hollandsch Koffiehuisch’, please keep an eye out for me, because I believe that they’ll be exceedingly fine things. I don’t know whether you’ll find it conceited of me or something like that when I tell you that the following gave me pleasure. Smulders’s workmen from the other warehouse in the Laan12 saw the stone of the orphan man and asked the printer if they could have an impression to hang up. No result of my work would be more agreeable to me than that ordinary working men should hang such prints in their room or workplace. I believe Herkomer speaks the truth when he says For you — the public — it is really done.  Of course a drawing must have artistic value, but in my view this shouldn’t rule out the possibility that ordinary passers-by may see something in it. Well, I regard this very first print as nothing as yet, but I hope from the bottom of my heart that it will become something more serious. 
   Because of the loss of those 50 francs (for I fear they’re gone), both you and I have had a setback in carrying out these experiments, but don’t let it discourage us. How I wish you could see the drawings I’m working on at the moment.  I assure you that when there was no letter from you, and I couldn’t think what the reason might be, I was very melancholy. I would very much like to hear something from you at your early convenience about what I’m sending today. I’ll also help you remember that you were going to return to the subject of Daumier — again, at your early convenience, for I understand that you don’t always have the time to write. Adieu, old chap, thanks again for your letter, and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent This evening I’ll begin reading Pot-bouille by Zola. Wednesday morning My dear Theo, Together with this letter you’re receiving the first proofs of one lithograph, Digger, and one lithograph, Coffee drinker. I’d very much like to know as soon as possible what impression they make on you. I still plan to retouch them on the stone, and would like to have your opinion for that. The drawings were better, I put a lot of work into the Digger especially; now various things have been lost through the transfer and printing. Yet what I think of these impressions is that there’s something rough and unabashed in them that I indeed wanted them to have, which partly reconciles me to the loss of things that were in the drawing. The drawing was done not only with lithographic crayon; the strengths were reinforced with autographic ink as well. Now the stone has only taken part of the autographic ink, and we don’t know exactly what to attribute this to, probably the water with which I mixed them.
   Anyway, as a result I’ve seen that where it has taken it gives good strengths of black, with which I hope to be more successful later on. Then, when the printer has time, we’re going to experiment by putting on a kind of wash during printing, and will try out various types of paper and different sorts of printing ink. I hope that these two stones will improve further through the retouching after the two studies, done directly from the model, which I still have.  It has finally come about that a painter has been to visit me, namely Van der Weele, who stopped me in the street and whom I had also visited once. I have hopes that he too will try this lithographic process. I would like him to do two ploughs he has with it, painted studies (a morning and evening effect), and an ox-cart on the heath. That fellow has several beautiful things in his studio. He wanted me to compose something from my numerous studies of orphan men, but I don’t feel ready yet.
   As you know, I wrote to you about a series of Diggers, now you can see a print from it. No news yet about the letter. The people at the post office here know nothing about it and blame it on Paris. When your last letter arrived I had to pay so much immediately, because I had waited for it for so long, that little was left. All the same, I again did these two lithographic trials, even though there were costs involved, because I think work offers the most hope, especially in difficult times, and intend to fight to pull through. Today or tomorrow, however, I’ll run out of money. If it’s possible for you to do something, do it — if not, then it isn’t your fault or mine, but the days would be hard. Anyway, nonetheless, as long as we can lift up our hearts8 as high as we can and as long as we can, above melancholy or weakening.
   There’s a popular magazine here called De Zwaluw which is published by Elsevier Rotterdam supported by the Society for General Welfare. I’ve sometimes wondered in recent days whether they could use a digger like that, for example. 1 print a month. But it would cost me a trip to Rotterdam, and I’m so afraid of coming back with the message: Things are too slack, we’re not taking anything &c. Moreover, I would prefer not to do this, since I would much rather work longer until a substantial series is possible. Yet I do consider it, because I’m sometimes desperate to earn a little extra. What to do? Even if you have no money, write anyway old chap, for I need your sympathy, and that’s no less of a support to me than the money. I hope you’ve now received the roll of lithographs with Sorrow in it and the letter. I mention it again to be sure, not because I already expected an answer. It has been very cold here. Today very dark grey and dreary, which, however, does give things a rough, burred look. Adieu, I sincerely wish you all the best, and a handshake in thought, believe me always Ever yours, Vincent In the drawing of the Coffee drinker the black was much more broken by the direction of the hatching. It has now become dull, unfortunately, but this can probably be corrected. My dear Theo, I received your registered letter of 20 Nov. in good order, and thank you very much for sending it. You’ll have seen how welcome it was from my letter, which must have crossed yours.  But you write that you sent the paper from Buhot at the same time as the letter — yet it wasn’t with it, and up to today, Friday, I don’t have it. Has the post made a mistake again, or do you perhaps still have it? I’ve waited until today to reply to your letter to see whether the post here had forgotten to deliver it, or something like that.  You also received the small roll with the Digger in it, I hope.  Today and yesterday I drew two figures of an old man with his elbows on his knees and his head in his hands. I did it of Schuitemaker once and always kept the drawing, because I wanted to do it better another time. Perhaps I’ll also do a lithograph of it. What a fine sight an old working man makes, in his patched bombazine suit with his bald head.  I’ve finished the book by Zola, Pot-bouille. I thought the most powerful passage was the kitchen maid Adele (scruffy Breton) giving birth in the dark attic room. Josserand is also portrayed with devilish skill and with sentiment. The rest of the characters too, but these two sombre ones, Josserand writing his addresses at night, and that tiny maid’s room, made the most impression on me.
   How well constructed the book is — and the words with which it ends are bitter: these days all houses are much of a muchness, it’s all the same, Swinery & Co. everywhere. Octave Mouret — actually the main character — couldn’t he be regarded as typical of the kind of people you wrote about recently, if you remember? He’s far better than most people, in many respects, but you won’t find him satisfactory any more than I do, and I sense an emptiness in him. Could he have done differently? Perhaps he couldn’t, but you and I can and must in my view. After all, we have our roots in a family life of a different kind from Mouret’s, and moreover there will always be something of the Brabant fields and heath in us I hope, which is all the less erasable by years of city life because art renews and adds to it. He — O. Mouret — is happy as long as he can sell his bales of novelties quickly (display his bales of goods on the pavements of Paris);7 he appears to have no other aspirations, except for conquests of women, and yet he wasn’t really fond of them, for Zola is right I believe when he says, ‘where his contempt for the female was apparent’. Anyway, I don’t know what to think of him. He seems to me to be a product of the time, actually more passive than active — despite his activity. 
   But after Zola’s book I read Quatre vingt treize by V. Hugo9 at long last. That’s entirely different territory. It’s painted, I mean written, like Decamps or Jules Dupré, with expressions as in old Ary Scheffers, such as The man in tears and The cutter of the tablecloth10 — or the figures in the background of Christus Consolator. I strongly recommend that you read it sometime if you haven’t read it, for the sentiment in which this book is written is becoming ever more uncommon, and amid the new I see nothing more noble. Truly.  It’s easier to say, as Mesdag did of a certain painting by Heyerdahl done in the sentiment of Murillo or Rembrandt that he didn’t want to buy from you, ‘Oh, that’s the old manner, we don’t need that’, than to replace the old manner by something equivalent, let alone something better. And since many reason like Mesdag these days, without giving it any further thought, it can do no harm if others do reflect on whether we are in the world to pull down rather than to build up. The phrase ‘not needed any more’ — how eagerly people use it and what a stupid and ugly phrase it is. I believe that in a certain fairy tale Andersen puts it in the mouth not of a person but of an old pig. People who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones. 
   This week it pleased me very much indeed to see (in the window at G&C) a painting by De Bock that seemed to me far, far better than the one he was working on in the spring.  This was a hut in the dunes with an avenue of trees in front of it. The background sombre and rich in tone, with a beautiful light sky behind. There was something very grand and lively about it.  I just said, people who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw stones. I fear, Theo, that it will come about that many who have sacrificed the old for the sake of the new will deeply regret it. Especially in the realm of art.  There was a body of painters, writers, artists in short, who were united despite their divisions, and formed one force. They did not walk in darkness but had this light, that they clearly knew what they wanted and did not doubt. I’m speaking of the time when Corot, Millet, Daubigny, Jacque, Breton, were young, in Holland Israëls, Mauve, Maris, &c. One thing reinforced the other, it was powerful and noble. The shops were smaller then, the studios perhaps had a greater abundance than now, since beautiful things soon went. Those crammed studios, those smaller shop windows, collier’s faith17 of the artists above all, their warmth, their fire, their enthusiasm — what sublime things they were. Neither you nor I actually witnessed it, but through our love for that time we know of it what we know of it — let us not forget it — it may be useful — particularly if people go on saying so eagerly, not needed any more.  Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours,  Vincent  Sunday My dear Theo, Yesterday I at last got around to reading a book by Murger, namely Les buveurs d’eau. I find something of the same charm in it as in, say, the drawings of Nanteuil, Baron, Roqueplan, Tony Johannot, something witty, something lively. Yet it’s highly conventional, or at least so this book seems to me (I haven’t yet read any others by him), and in my view there’s the same difference between him and Alph. Karr and Souvestre, for example, as between an Henry Monnier and Compte-Calix and the above artists. I’m trying to take all the people I compare from the same era.  It breathes that age of la bohème (though the reality of that period is papered over in the book) and that’s why it interests me, but in my view it lacks originality and honesty of sentiment. It may be, though, that his books in which there are no painter characters are better than this one — it appears that writers are always unfortunate with painter characters, Balzac among them (his painters are fairly uninteresting). Even Zola might be right in his Claude Lantier — Claude Lantiers certainly exist — but still one would like to see Zola doing a kind of painter different from Lantier for once, who it seems to me is drawn from life by Zola after someone or other, and certainly not the worst, from the movement that was known as Impressionists, I believe. And they aren’t the ones who make up the core of the body of artists.
   Conversely, I know of few good drawn or painted portraits of writers. On this point most painters also lapse into the conventional and make of a writer a man who simply sits at a table full of papers, or don’t even go that far and make him a gentleman with a collar and tie, and moreover a face without any particular expression.  There’s a painter by Meissonier that I find beautiful; it’s that figure seen from behind, bending forwards, with the feet on the cross-bar of the easel, I believe. All one sees is a pair of knees drawn up, a back, a neck and the back of a head, and just a glimpse of a fist with a pencil or something like that. But the fellow does it well, and the action of concentrated attention is caught, just like in a certain figure by Rembrandt where a little fellow sits reading, also huddled up, with his head resting on his fist, and one immediately feels that sense of being absolutely gripped by the book. Take the Victor Hugo by Bonnat7 — beautiful, really beautiful — but even more beautiful in my view is the Victor Hugo described in words by Victor Hugo himself, nothing else than just this: And I, I was silent —  As one sees a blackcock keep silent on the heath. Don’t you think that little figure on the heath is splendid? Isn’t it as vivid as a little general of 93 by Meissonier9 — about 1 centimetre or so in size? There’s a portrait of Millet by Millet that I find beautiful, no more than a head with a kind of shepherd’s cap on top. But the looking — with half-closed eyes — the intense looking of a painter — how beautifully that’s caught, and that cockerel-like quality, if I may put it like that. 
   It’s Sunday again. This morning I was on Rijswijkseweg. The meadows are partly flooded so that there was an effect of tonal green and silver with the rough, black and grey and green trunks and branches of old trees twisted by the wind in the foreground, a silhouette of the village with its spire against the light sky in the background, here and there a fence, or a dung-heap with a flock of crows picking at it.  How you would feel something like that — how well you would paint it if you wanted to. It was extraordinarily beautiful this morning, and it did me good to go for a long walk, for with all the drawing and the lithographs I’d hardly been out of doors this week.  As to the lithography, I hope to get a proof tomorrow of an old man. I hope it turns out well. I did it with a kind of crayon that’s specially intended for this process, but I fear that the ordinary lithographic crayon will turn out to be the best after all, and I’ll be sorry I didn’t use that. Well, we’ll see how it turns out.  Tomorrow I hope to learn various things about printing that the printer’s going to show me. I would love to learn how to print myself. I think it quite possible that this new method will revive lithography. I believe that a way could be found of uniting the advantages of the new with the old method. One can never predict anything for certain, but who knows whether it might not lead to new magazines being founded again. Monday That was as far as I got yesterday evening — this morning I had to go to the printer’s with my old man. Now I’ve followed everything: the transfer to the stone, the preparation of the stone, the actual printing. And I have a better understanding of what I can change by retouching. Herewith the first impression, not counting one that went wrong.  I hope to do it better in time. I myself am very far from satisfied with this but, well, getting better must come through doing it and through trying. It seems to me that a painter has a duty to try to put an idea into his work. I was trying to say this in this print — but I can’t say it as beautifully, as strikingly as reality, of which this is only a dim reflection seen in a dark mirror14 — that it seems to me that one of the strongest pieces of evidence for the existence of ‘something on high’15 in which Millet believed, namely in the existence of a God and an eternity, is the unutterably moving quality that there can be in the expression of an old man like that, without his being aware of it perhaps, as he sits so quietly in the corner of his hearth. At the same time something precious, something noble, that can’t be meant for the worms.  Israëls has done it so very beautifully. Perhaps the most wonderful passage in Uncle Tom’s cabin is the one where the poor slave, sitting by his fire for the last time and knowing that he must die, remembers the words Let cares like a wild deluge come, And storms of sorrow fall, May I but safely reach my home, My god, my Heaven, my All. This is far from all theology — simply the fact that the poorest woodcutter, heath farmer or miner can have moments of emotion and mood that give him a sense of an eternal home that he is close to. 
   Just as I get back from the printer’s I receive your letter. I think your Montmartre19 is splendid, and I would certainly have shared the emotion that it evoked in you. I believe, by the way, that Jules Dupré or Daubigny also often tried to arouse those thoughts in their work. Sometimes there’s something indescribable in those effects — it’s as if the whole of nature is speaking — and when one goes home one has the same feeling as when one has just finished a book by Victor Hugo, for example. For my part I can’t understand that not everyone sees and feels it — after all, nature or God does it for everyone who has eyes and ears and a heart to perceive. I think that a painter is happy because he’s in harmony with nature as soon as he can depict, to some extent, what he sees.  And that’s a great deal. One knows what one has to do; there’s an abundance of subjects and Carlyle rightly says, Blessed is he who has found his work. If that work — as in the case of Millet, Dupré, Israëls &c. — is something intended to bring peace, to say sursum corde 22 or ‘lift up your hearts’, then it’s doubly encouraging. One is also less alone then, because one thinks: I may be here on my own, but while I’m here holding my tongue my work may be speaking to my friend, and whoever sees it won’t suspect me of being cold-hearted. 
   Understand, however, that the dissatisfaction about poor work, the failure of things, the technical difficulties can make one terribly melancholy.  I assure you that when I, for my part, think of Millet, of Israëls, Breton, Degroux23 — so many others, Herkomer among them — I can be terribly despondent. One only knows what those fellows are when one is at work. Now, to stomach that despondency and melancholy as one is, to be patient with oneself, not to take a rest but to toil despite a thousand shortcomings and faults and the precariousness of the victory — that’s why a painter is also not happy: the battle with himself, improving himself, renewing his energy. All this complicated by the material difficulties.  That painting by Daumier must have been beautiful. It’s puzzling that something that speaks as clearly as that, for example, isn’t understood, or at least that the position is that, as you say, it isn’t certain a buyer will be found, even at a low price.  For many a painter this is something intolerable, or almost intolerable, at least. One wants to be an honest man, and one is, one works just as hard as a porter, and yet one falls short, one has to give the work up, one sees no chance of carrying it out without spending more on it than one will get back for it. One has a feeling of guilt, of falling short, of not keeping promises, one isn’t honest as one would be 
   if the work was paid for at its natural, fair price. One is afraid to make friends, one is afraid to stir, one would like to call out to people from a distance like one of the old lepers: Don’t come too close, for contact with me will bring you sorrow and harm. With this whole avalanche of cares in one’s heart, one must set to work with a calm, everyday face, without moving a muscle, carry on with daily life, try things out with the models, with the man who comes to collect the rent, in short, with all and sundry. One must cool-headedly keep one hand on the tiller to continue the work, and with the other hand try to ensure that one does no harm to others. And then come storms, things one hadn’t foreseen; one doesn’t know what to do, and one has a feeling that one may hit a rock at any moment.  One can’t present oneself as somebody who can be of benefit to others or who has an idea for a business that’s bound to be profitable — no, on the contrary, it’s to be expected that it will end with a deficit and yet, yet, one feels a power seething inside one, one has a task to do and it must be done. One would like to speak like the men of 93, we must do this and that, first those, then those, then the last will die, it’s a duty so it goes without saying, and nothing more need be added. 
   Yet this is the time to combine and to speak. Or is it rather that, given that many have fallen asleep and don’t wish to be woken up, one must try to confine oneself to things that one can finish alone, which one faces alone and has sole responsibility for? So that those who sleep can go on sleeping and rest. Now you see that this time I too am expressing more intimate thoughts than normally; you’re to blame for this, because you did the same.  Concerning you, this is what I think: you are after all one of those on watch, not one of the sleepers. Would you not rather keep watch while painting than while selling paintings? I say this coolly, not even adding: this or that would be preferable in my view, and trusting to your own insight into things. That one runs a high risk of going under oneself, that being a painter is like being a forward sentry, this and other things — that goes without saying. You mustn’t think I’m so very afraid; painting the Borinage would be something, for instance. That would be so difficult, so dangerous even, as is needed for a life in which rest and pleasure are quite a long way off. All the same, I would undertake something like that if I could undertake it, that is if I couldn’t foresee for certain, as I do now, that the costs would exceed my means. If I found others interested in this or a similar enterprise, I would risk it. Precisely because at the moment it’s really only you who cares what I do, for the time being it’s in the dark and must remain there. So I’ll find things to do in the meantime. But I’m not leaving it in order to spare myself or anything like that. I hope it’ll be possible for you to send something again not later than 1 Dec. Well, old chap, I thank you right heartily for your letter, and a warm handshake in thought, believe me Ever yours,  Vincent My dear Theo, In the last few days I had a letter from Rappard, with whom I’m in correspondence about the trials with lithography and who has himself done a little with it. I wrote to him in passing: I’ve run into another obstacle; a letter with money that I had largely earmarked for them has been lost. He wrote in reply, don’t let that hold you back, and count on me if you can’t carry on or need something. I didn’t tell him so that he would say something like that, but because I wanted him to make some new trials himself. But it gave me pleasure because such signs of interest are rare. I wrote back to him:1 for the present I’m declining the offer, but we’ll return to the subject if it really does become a question of not being able to continue at all. And I told him how much I appreciated it. See, that’s one of the cases I wrote to you about in my last letter. 
   Of course there are costs involved in the drawing, the stone, the printing, the paper. These are relatively low. Prints like the last one I sent you, say, like a new one that I finished yesterday evening and is now ready, would I believe be suitable for a popular edition, for instance, which is so desperately, desperately needed here in Holland, more than elsewhere.  Now such an undertaking like making and printing a series of 30 with Working types, say — sower, digger, woodcutter, ploughman, washerwoman, plus on occasion a cradle or orphan man, in short, the whole vast field lies open, there’s an abundance of fine material — an enterprise like that — may one undertake it or may one not? It goes even deeper: is it a duty and just, or is it wrong? That is the question. 
   If I were a man of means, I wouldn’t hesitate to decide, I would say, Onward, and be quick about it.  But in this case it’s different. May one, must one, can one involve others whom one needs, without whom one can’t carry it out, and drag them into an affair of which it’s doubtful whether it will be profitable? I wouldn’t spare myself. You’ve shown through your help to me that you don’t spare yourself either. Yet others think it both wrong of you and foolish that you took an interest in me, and they believe even more strongly that what I do is absurd, and many who were full of enthusiasm at first end up thinking that too, and are only briefly brave and fiery, like a straw fire.  Really very unfairly in my view, for neither you nor I are acting foolishly in this. This matter, which not long ago was no more than a few words from you, namely ‘I’ve spoken to Buhot, who knows of a certain way of lithographing, of which more later, you ought to try something on paper that he’ll send you’, 
   has in a short time taken on the proportions of a more important matter for me from this initially rather insignificant start.  I see that with persistence and perseverance it could become something which I believe could be absolutely not superfluous but decidedly good and useful.  It has always been said: in Holland we can’t make magazines for the people. I’ve never been entirely able to believe this. I see now: it CAN be done. The Society for General Welfare has given thousands to Elsevier in Rotterdam to support the publishing of De Zwaluw. Now has De Zwaluw turned out to be good? NO. While there were a few fine prints in it, it was too feeble, too insubstantial, not serious, not vigorous enough. An imitation of the English, not original enough. There are two systems, How not to do it and How to do it.  How not to do it was, I fear, Elsevier’s ulterior motive, OTHERWISE HE WOULD HAVE DONE IT even if it had cost him his own money. How not to do it reasons as follows: I have so much and so much for it from the Welfare, I have so much and so much from sales — of that, I must put so and so much in my pocket first — I must do just as my colleagues do or they’ll call me an awkward customer6 or a man with a reputation &c. So it comes about that instead of saying what was written beneath a painting by Millais, ‘IT MIGHT BE DONE AND IF SO WE SHOULD DO IT’, Elsevier and a thousand like him say, it can’t be done, or do it too feebly and without enough energy. I don’t know the management of De Zwaluw well enough to say exactly who’s to blame, but I know their magazine well enough to dare take upon myself to say, ‘you haven’t made of it what you could have made of it, it could and should have been better’. 
   Now, moreover, I say all the same: be that as it may, in every age there have also been resolute, sincere, brave, honest Dutchmen; even in times when things in general were feeble and enervated and wrong, here and there one found the fire still burning in hidden corners. How much more so in those periods in which the Dutch could be counted among the first and the best. So when it comes down to daring and self-sacrifice and venturing on something that doesn’t have to be done for gain but because it’s useful and good: one must keep one’s trust in one’s fellow man and fellow countrymen in general. Before I go any further, though, this — I personally don’t want to have any more to do with the business of prints for the people beyond the making of them, in the event that some such venture is started. It must be a matter of charity, not of bookshops. And as it will be necessary to have some contact with the bookshops, if only as regards printing and so on, I mention it to you now, not to ask you, ‘do you think it will succeed?’ from the bookshop’s point of view, but just with the question How to do it?
   from the point of view that it would be out of love for the cause. In my opinion the following would have to be laid down: Given that it’s useful and needful for Dutch drawings to be made, printed and circulated, intended for workers’ dwellings, farmhouses, in a word, for every working man, several parties undertake to do their utmost, to exert their best efforts for this goal. This association not to be dissolved before the venture is completed, and endeavouring to carry it out as practically and as well as possible.  The price of the prints is not to exceed 10 or at the most 15 cents. Publication shall begin when a series of 30 has been made and printed, and the costs involved (for stones, printing wages, paper) have been paid. These thirty prints will appear simultaneously, although available separately, together forming a set in linen cover with a short text, not to go with the prints — which speak for themselves — but to explain pithily how and 
   for what purpose they were made &c. The raison d’être of the association is this. If the draughtsmen stand alone they’ll have to bear both the effort and the costs — the venture would founder before it was half way — so the burden must be shared so that each gets the part that he can bear and so that the venture can be accomplished. The amount raised by sales will be used first to reimburse those who advanced money, second to give everyone who has supplied a drawing an amount to be determined later that is the same for each draughtsman.  When these payments have been made, what remains will be used for new publications to carry on the work.  Those who begin this venture regard it as a duty. Self-interest not being their aim, neither those who advance money nor draughtsmen nor those who participate in other ways may claim back what they have contributed in the event that the venture yields no profit, so that their contribution is lost; nor may they claim back more than they have put in should the venture be successful beyond expectation.  In the latter case the surplus will be used to carry on the work, in the former case, however, the stones remain the property of the entrepreneurs; in any event though, the first 700 impressions from each stone are intended not for the association but for the people. If the association founders, those prints will be distributed free of charge. Immediately after the publication of the first series of 30 there must be a debate and decision on whether or not to continue, and at that point, but not before, whoever so wishes may withdraw from the association.  This is the idea that took shape in my mind — now I say to you: How to do it? Will you take part?  I haven’t spoken to others about this, the idea first having become clear to me while I was at work. But 
   I’ve long been in touch with Rappard on the question of prints for the people, since both he and I attach importance to it, so that he himself, as I wrote to you, said to me of his own accord, I want to give you a helping hand.  Rappard doesn’t, however, view the matter in the way that I would like him to: the thing is, he doesn’t agree with me on questions of technique. As to his proposal about advancing me money, I’ve decided to agree to it.  I refuse it for myself personally, because I would only pursue it alone if the kind of association I’ve described to you couldn’t be established. At that point I would have to see what more I could do. For the present I share my thoughts about the matter with him, and ask him as I ask you, couldn’t we start something of that kind? And for my part I would wish everyone in the association to be completely equal — with no regulations or president or this or that — just a memorandum laying down the venture which, after it had been finally drawn up and signed by the entrepreneurs, couldn’t be altered other than by a unanimous vote — also the names of those who committed themselves (but not to make them public; the matter must be an artistic, a private venture), together with what they are doing for the cause: A undertakes to make this or that, B gives this or that for it &c., nothing more. In the meantime it’s now 1 Nov. If you haven’t yet written, do so as soon as you possibly can. I have nothing left. Adieu, believe me, with a hearty handshake, Ever yours,  Vincent It should be an association for doing, not for debating — for acting decisively and without losing time, seeing the whole venture as ‘for charity’, not ‘for bookshops’. 
   Now something else. One must be prepared for what it entails.  30 stones, printing wages, paper. What do they cost? I don’t know exactly, but I think 300 guilders would go a long way. The drawings are the contributions by the members of the association who cannot give any money. I’m ready to take on all of them if no one else presents himself, but I would rather that better people than I took it on.  Sending the first 30 into the world seems to be desirable in any event, and I would be glad to carry on with it even if no enthusiasts came forward to make drawings for the time being, because showing that series to artists who could do it better than I might persuade them to take part. Many only want to start when they know for sure that it’s serious, and refuse to become involved as long as the first steps haven’t been taken.  My dear Theo, Accept my cordial thanks for your registered letter and for the roll. In it I found the paper from Buhot. But I’d like to have some information to go with it, for example, With what does one draw on this paper? Perhaps I’ll be told that later.  Renouard’s Children in care1 are wonderful, also his new drawing, The dock2 — although the latter is less important than his large prints of the Mazas prison, for example. I’m very pleased with them and thank you for them.  You’ll have received an impression of a lithograph. Actually it went wrong — but I sent it anyway because there are some bits in it that have turned out as I had intended the whole thing to be.  This time the autographic ink ran badly and that had to be corrected later, but there were still black passages everywhere. But look, for example, at the left leg with the muddy boot. There one can see that fabrics can be rendered with this process and curious effects obtained.  Hands and head are poor, yet in the other old man5 they’re the best part. Again I watched the transfer to stone and the printing carefully, and I must say that I believe a great deal can be done with this process.  Today I was at Van der Weele’s — he took considerable pleasure in the old man with his head in his hands and intends to try it himself.  He’s someone who makes truly splendid things sometimes. He gave me 4 etchings, a sheepfold, calves in a copse — two sand-carts and an ox-plough, and I hope to get more later when he has impressions made again. He doesn’t seem to like Tersteeg very much. At least, without my saying anything about him, and while we were talking about Van der W.’s own studies, he said, all right, but if I do this or do that and I go to Tersteeg he makes such and such a remark. I believe he was speaking the truth and, honestly, I’m very sorry that things are like this. I would rather that I was mistaken in my 
   opinion of Tersteeg, but I fear he rather discourages many who truly deserve something better. How tiresome these matters are.  Yesterday I received a letter, not from Rappard but from his father, telling me that R. is ill. I don’t know what’s wrong with him — perhaps, perhaps what you and I are also familiar with. The thought occurred to me because of several expressions in his last letter, when he wrote that I should carry on doing experiments and that he felt so feeble that he could do nothing. What a pity for him, isn’t it? It’s so hard if one has to stop one’s work right in the middle for such a feeble reason as illness. I’ll very much want to look him up sometime, if I hear that he isn’t getting better quickly. I’ve corresponded with him quite a lot about work recently. He has taken very great pleasure in collecting woodcuts, for example, and I think it highly likely that with time we’ll be more and more help to each other.  At Van der Weele’s I saw an outstanding sketch by Breitner, a drawing that was unfinished, and perhaps couldn’t be finished. It was of officers deliberating over a map or battle-plan before an open window. Breitner does indeed have a position at the secondary school in Rotterdam. A solution for him. Can one keep that up? Not doing anything else and devoting all one’s time to the work, that’s still preferable in my view. It’s as if there’s something fatal in holding other positions — perhaps it’s precisely the worries, precisely the dark side of the artistic life, that’s the best part of it. It’s risky to say this, and there are moments when one talks differently — many go under because of the worry — but those who struggle through benefit later. 
   You write about the question of making drawings in a smaller format. I think it good of you that you speak about this question in a calmer manner than others, who have sometimes said the same thing to me in a very different way and told me, if you don’t work smaller then this will happen and that will happen. Talking about it like that seems to me premature and superficial, and I can’t believe that what they say is true. Do you know what I think — all formats have their pros and cons. In general, for my own study, I definitely need to have the figure in fairly large proportions, so that head, hands, feet aren’t too small and one can draw them robustly. So for my own study I took as my example the format of Bargue’s Exercices au fusain, because that size is easy to take in at a glance and yet the details don’t become too small. But most take a smaller format. For my part, from the beginning I’ve done it like this for myself, sometimes a little smaller, sometimes a little larger, and for my own study I would be going against my convictions if I deviated from that.  Yet, so although this is for me the focus of my attention — to have the human figure in my power in a good, substantial size — an enormously difficult thing, I do assure you — it’s still the case that I’m by no means absolutely tied to it. And so in 
   reply to what you write I put to you a question in return: do you have a particular work in mind; has someone said something to you like, for instance, if those figures were half the size, sheets of this kind could be used for this or that? And if you know of anything like that, I, for my part, will take the trouble either to reduce figures I already have to half the size, or to draw completely new ones in a smaller format.  Without a specific reason I would think it less important than with a specific reason.  If it’s so that, were I to send you some figures, say half the size of the last ones, you’d be willing to make new attempts without being able to say at this stage specifically where or what for, that would be reason enough for me to make them.  What I just said is only to point out to you how I’ve tried from the outset to maintain a certain order in my work, set a sort of rule for myself, not to be a slave to that rule but because it helps one to think more clearly.  Reducing a certain figure to half the size, for example, isn’t difficult at all — although sometimes one loses something of what makes it distinctive — but sometimes the figure gains by it. At any rate, I’ll send you a few shortly, but if you have something particular in mind for them, tell me what they’re for — that will help me in the choice of my figures. Thank you again for what you sent. What I wrote to you in my last letter about a plan for making prints for the people is something to which I hope you’ll give some thought one day. I don’t have a fixed plan about this myself as yet, only in order to have it clear in my mind I’ll have things to do relating both to the drawings themselves and to the process of reproduction.  But I don’t doubt the possibility of doing something like this, nor its usefulness. Nor can I doubt that people can be found whose heart would be in it. In short, I believe it could be done in such a way that no one would need regret having taken part. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’m re-reading your last letter as I write to you. In particular what you say about format. I’d like to give you an example of a draughtsman you know: Théophile Schuler, who illustrated the works of Erckmann-Chatrian. One clearly sees from those small illustrations that he could work excellently on a small scale. One sees it even better in things he did at that time for L’Illustration and Magasin Pittoresque, for example, among them L’Album des Vosges, to which Brion and Jundt also contributed.  I believe, though, that it would be a great mistake to imagine that such things as, for instance, the print The grace14 (a family of woodcutters or peasants at table) were created at a stroke in their final form. No, in most cases the solidity and pith of the small is only obtained through much more serious study than is imagined by those who think lightly of the task of illustrating. Oh, old chap, you’re one of the best-informed art dealers I know, and you speak about this much more accurately and sensitively than most, but if you knew how much hard graft some things have required — for instance, prints from Album des Vosges or those first things in The Graphic — I believe you would be struck by them. With me, at least, it’s often the case that as I learn more about the life and work of fellows like Schuler, Lançon, Renouard, and so many others, I sense that what one sees of them is only the tiny puff of smoke that comes out of their chimney, and that within their heart and studio there’s a great fire.  In the illustrated magazines they undergo something like the small tower in the distance that looks very small and insignificant, and when one gets up close proves to be an imposing mass (I mean, only a small part of their work is made public).  Anyway, some paintings in their huge frames look very substantial, and later one is surprised when they actually leave behind such an empty and dissatisfied feeling. On the other hand, one overlooks many an unpretentious woodcut or lithograph or etching now and then, but comes back to it and becomes more and more attached to it with time, and senses something great in it.  I know a drawing by Tenniel of ‘two clergymen’ (this isn’t the English title, of course, but it’s the subject). One is a city vicar, splendid and broad and imposing; the other is slightly ‘shabby’, evidently a humble village curate, the father of a large and poor family. I often think that one finds these two types among painters as well, and many ‘illustrators’ belong to the village curates among the painters, while perhaps people like Bouguereau or Makart and some others have something of the first type. 
   Now whether, for my part, I have to work in a smaller or larger format makes relatively little difference to me, but what the illustrated magazines ask is only part of what I demand of myself. Of myself I firmly demand that I can make the figure of a size such that head, hands and feet don’t become too small and the details remain clear.  This is still very far from being what I require of myself, but for that very reason I must stand firm on that point.  When I require this, I’m not making other demands of myself than very many others make of themselves. For example, with the series of drawings I’m working on now I don’t know what the final form or size will be. After a great deal of thought, I’ve made them about the size of the man with his head in his hands, but I can of course reduce the size of these designs if I wish when it comes to printing.  And that there are reasons for drawing the figures fairly large in practice is shown, for example, by Exercices au fusain, Modèles d’après les maîtres, published by G&Cie. I began with them, and so far I haven’t found a better guide to studies from the live model. The book was intended to introduce sound ideas about study, both in the schools and certainly above all in the studios. I’ve listened to what Bargue says in his examples (though my work is far from being as beautiful as his). I believe that they point to a correct way in accordance with what other men taught earlier, among them L. da Vinci — and in any event through it I’ve brought a certain order to my ideas on drawing which results in work proceeding in a better-regulated way than if one imposes no order on one’s actions. You see, that’s something I may not let go of, but, again, if desired, I can reduce the format of this or that figure in my studies. I’d very much like you to see everything I’ve done since this summer all together again. What’s happened to those drawings that you wrote you had sent through rue Chaptal? I haven’t yet received them, but I suspect they’re still with you, since you wrote shortly afterwards that Buhot had seen them. Of course I don’t need them in a hurry, and only mention them in case they may be lying around somewhere. And if you consider it advisable to keep them with you in case you want to talk to someone about them, I have nothing against that, except that I wish you could perhaps make a new selection from the whole lot for that purpose. My dear Theo, You’ve received my letter in which I wrote about how, while I was working, an idea came to me for making figures from the people for the people. How it seemed to me that it would be a good thing if several individuals joined together for this purpose, not for the bookshops but out of charity and duty. Since I wrote that to you, I’ve naturally thought not so much ‘Who will do this or that?’ as ‘What shall I do for it?’ on the grounds that I’m not responsible for the one, but I am for the latter.  But I can tell you this, just when I was drawing for this purpose the idea took shape more firmly in my mind that setting up such a thing would be useful, and that there would be absolutely no need to resort to aping other popular publications, that on the contrary, the existence of similar magazines like British Workman, for instance, is a guide as to How to do it and How not to do it. I don’t know whether you know Little Dorrit by Dickens and the character Doyce in it, the man who could be taken as typical of those who have as their principle: How to do it.  Even if you don’t know this wonderful figure of a working man from the book, you will understand the chap’s character from this one quotation. When what he wanted didn’t come about, encountering indifference and even worse, and he couldn’t carry on, he simply said: This misfortune alters nothing — the thing is just as true now (after the failure) as it was then (before the failure). 
   And began again on the continent with what hadn’t succeeded in England, and launched it there.  What I wanted to say is this. The idea of drawing types of working man from the people for the people, and circulating them as a popular publication, seeing the whole thing as necessarily being an affair of duty and charity — that and nothing else than that — see, that idea is such that I believe one is entitled to assume, even if it isn’t successful immediately or at once: The thing is as true today as it was yesterday, and will be as true tomorrow. And that it’s thus something that one can begin and pursue with serenity, something whose good outcome one also needn’t doubt or despair of — provided one doesn’t weaken or lose heart.  I said to myself that what I should do was obvious — do my very best with the drawings. So since my letter on this subject I now have some new ones. 
   First of all a Sower. A big old chap, a tall dark silhouette against a dark ground. Far off a heath cottage with a mossy roof and a bit of sky with a lark. This is a sort of cockerel type:7 a shaven face, fairly sharp nose and chin, the eye small, mouth sunken. Long legs with boots.  Then a second sower with a light brown bombazine jacket and trousers, so this figure comes out light against the black field bounded at the end by a row of pollard willows. This is a very different type, with a fringe of beard, broad shoulders, a little stocky, a little like an ox in the sense that his whole appearance has been shaped by working on the land. If you like, more the type of an Eskimo, thick lips, broad nose.  Then a reaper with a big scythe in a pasture. The head with a brown woollen cap stands out against the light sky. Then one of the old boys with short jackets and big, old top hats one meets sometimes in the dunes.  He’s carrying home a basket of peat.  Now in these drawings I’ve tried to express my intention even more clearly than in the old man with his head in his hands. All these chaps are doing something, and I think that in general that, above all, should be adhered to in the choice of subjects. You yourself know how fine the numerous resting figures are, which are made so very, very often. They’re done more often than working figures. It’s always very tempting to draw a figure at rest — expressing action is very difficult, and in the eyes of many the effect is ‘more pleasing’ than anything else. But this pleasing aspect mustn’t lose sight of truth, and the truth is that there’s more toil than rest in life. 
   So you see that my attitude to it all is chiefly this, that for my part I’m trying to work on it. It seems to me that the drawings themselves have greater urgency than even the reproduction.  I’ll also be careful about talking about the matter, because I believe that people generally act more practically in a small group than when many are involved.  Too many cooks spoil the broth. How I wish we were together a little more. Do you know why I, for my part, don’t doubt that I could do it? You know from physics that an object immersed in a fluid loses as much weight as the specific gravity of the amount of fluid that the body displaces. This is why some things float, and why even those that sink are lighter under water than in the air. Something similar — a kind of fixed law of nature — seems to exist as regards working, in the sense that when one is engaged in it, one feels more capacity for work than one knew one had, or rather actually did have. You would experience that too if you set yourself to painting sometime. At first it seems something unattainable, a hopeless thing, later it becomes clear, and I believe that you would see this in my work too.  But something I’ve already written to you has been confirmed, namely that Rappard is seriously ill. I’ve again had news from his father, who doesn’t say what it is exactly. By the time he’s better I want to have as many drawings as possible finished, because I’d like R. to do the same as soon as he’s up and about. R. has what not everyone has, namely he ponders, and his feeling is something he cultivates. He can make a plan, take stock of something, keep hold of an idea.
    Many others regard the pondering and the willing as unartistic, are at least not equipped for long-term labours. The matter in question now involves both skill and action and perseverance, and furthermore being calmly patient. Then Rappard has another thing that in my view means he can be of great value for something like this. He really studies the figure, not just as a note of colour in a watercolour, but more strictly as to its form and structure.  I often think I’d like to be able to spend more time on landscape proper. I often see things that I find remarkably beautiful, which moreover make me say instinctively, I’ve never seen this or that painted like that.  In order to paint it — how to do it — I would have to give up other things. I would like to know whether you agree with me that in landscape there are things that have still not been done, that, for example, Emile Breton has imparted effects (himself continues to work in that direction) that are a beginning of something new which it seems to me hasn’t yet reached its full force, understood by few, practised by even fewer. Many landscape painters don’t have that intimate knowledge of nature possessed by those who have looked at the fields with feeling from childhood. Many landscape painters give something that satisfies neither you nor me, for example, as people (even if we appreciate them as artists). People call Emile Breton’s work superficial, which it isn’t, he ranks much higher in sentiment than many others, and knows much more and his work holds up. 
   Truly, huge voids are also beginning to come in the sphere of landscape, and I’d like to apply a remark by Herkomer: the interpreters allow their cleverness to mar the dignity of their calling. And I believe that the public will begin to say, deliver us from artistic combinations, give us back the simple field. How good it feels to see a fine Rousseau that has been laboured over in order to be faithful and honest. How good it feels to think of people like Van Goyen, Old Crome and Michel. How beautiful an Isaac Ostade or a Ruisdael is. Do I want them back, or do I want them to be imitated? No, but I do want the honesty, the naivety, the faithfulness to remain. I know old lithographs by Jules Dupré, either by himself or facsimiles of his croquis. But what spirit and what love is in them, and yet how freely and gaily they are done. Copying nature absolutely isn’t the ideal either, but knowing nature in such a way that what one does is fresh and true — that’s what many now lack. Do you think, for instance, that De Bock knows what you know? No, most definitely not. You will say, but everyone has surely seen landscapes and figures from childhood. Question: was everyone also thoughtful as a child? Question: did everyone who saw them — heath, grassland, fields, woods — also love them, and the snow and the rain and the storm? Not everyone has that the way you and I do; it takes a special kind of setting and circumstances to contribute to it, and a special kind of temperament and character as well to make it take root. 
   I remember letters from you from when you were still in Brussels15 with descriptions of landscapes like those in your last letters.  Do you realize that it’s so very, very necessary that honest people should remain in art? I’m not saying that there are none, but you yourself feel what I mean, and know as well as I how a host of people who paint are enormous liars. Honesty is the best policy16 applies here too, as does the fable of the hare and the tortoise, and the ugly duckling by Andersen. Edwin Edwards the etcher, for example — why is his work so absolutely beautiful, why did he rightly gain a position among the best in England? Because what he wanted was honesty and faithfulness. I would rather be Jules Dupré than Edwin Edwards, but, you see, one must have great respect for sincerity, and it holds up when other things turn out to be chaff.  To me the Bernier, The fields in winter in the Luxembourg is an ideal.  Then you have Lavieille, the wood engraver and painter — I saw a winter night with a Christmas sentiment by him20 that now comes to mind. Then you have Mme Collart — for instance that painting of an apple orchard with an old white horse.  Then you have Chintreuil and Goethals. (I’ve often sought someone in order to explain to you with whom the beautiful things by Goethals could be compared — I believe Chintreuil.) But then I don’t know much of Chintreuil’s work, or of Goethals’s either, for that matter. 
   Misconceptions as to the intentions of the great landscape painters are to a large extent the cause of the trouble. Almost no one knows that the secret of beautiful work is to a large extent good faith and sincere feeling.  Many can’t help it that they aren’t deep enough, and act in good faith, in so far as they have good faith.  Yet I believe you’ll admit (the more so since it’s a question here of something that isn’t your own sphere, although it does concern you somewhat) that it’s a fact that if many a landscape painter who is now highly rated knew half what you know of sound ideas about the outdoors, with which you’re naturally familiar, he would produce much better and sounder work. Think this over, and put this and many more things besides in the balance when, weighing yourself, you say things like, ‘I would only be something mediocre’. Unless you mean mediocre in its good, noble sense. Stalwartness, as people say here, they make great play of this word – for my part I don’t know the true meaning of it, and have heard it applied to very insignificant things – stalwartness, is that what must save art? I would be more hopeful that things were going well if there were more people like E. Frère or Emile Breton, for example, rather than stalwarts like Boldini or Fortuny coming. Frère, Breton, will be missed and mourned; Boldini, Fortuny, one may respect them in themselves, but the influence they exercised is fatal.  A chap like Gustave Brion has left something good, Degroux, for instance, too. If there were many more like them the world would be a better place; art would be a blessing. But Boldini, but Fortuny, but Regnault even, what good does it do us, what progress have we made? What you say is absolutely true, ‘Seriousness is better than raillery, however sharp and witty it is’. In other words, I would say, loving-kindness is better than mockery, that goes without saying, but many say, no, there’s good in that mocking. Well, they must reap as they sow. Adieu, old chap, I wanted to write to you about the drawings, namely that I hope this idea of prints for the people will induce me to make some progress. As I write to you, news of Rappard that there’s some change for the better, but he seems to be very ill. I know for sure that both he and his father are interested in the types from the people. I hope to go over there as soon as Rappard is back on his feet, or at least when his eyes are normal again. Write again soon, and believe me Ever yours,  Vincent My dear Theo, I often get around to writing to you on Sundays, and likewise today. I’ve been reading Le Nabab by Daudet1 these past few days, and find it masterly — among other things that walk taken by the Nabab and Hemerlingue the banker at Père Lachaise in the twilight while the bust of Balzac, a dark silhouette against the sky, looks down on them ironically. It’s just like a drawing by Daumier. You wrote to me about Daumier saying that he’d made The Revolution — Denis Dussoubs. When you wrote that, I didn’t know who Denis Dussoubs was; now I’ve read it in Histoire d’un crime by Victor Hugo. He’s a noble character — I wish I knew the drawing by D. Of course I can’t read a book about Paris without instantly thinking of you. I also can’t read a book about Paris without to some extent also finding The Hague in it, which is admittedly smaller than Paris but still a court city with corresponding morals. When you say in your last letter ‘what a riddle there is in nature’, I echo your words. Life in the abstract is already a riddle, reality turns it into a riddle within a riddle.  And who are we to solve it? All the same, we ourselves form a particle of it, of the society of which we ask, Where is it going, to the devil or to God?  Yet the sun rises, says V. Hugo.  Long, long ago, in L’ami Fritz by Erckmann-Chatrian, I read a remark by the old rabbi that has often come to mind since: ‘We are not alive in order to be happy, but we must try to deserve happiness.’5 Taken in isolation, this thought seems a little pedantic, at least one could interpret it as a little pedantic, but in the context in which the remark occurred, namely on the lips of the sympathetic figure of old Rabbi David Sechel, it struck me deeply and I often think of it. Also when drawing — one shouldn’t count on selling one’s drawings, but one has a duty to make them such that they have value and are serious. For one may not become nonchalant or indifferent, even if one is disappointed by one’s circumstances. 
   As for my plan with the lithographs, I’ve thought about it a lot; if that had been all, I fear I wouldn’t have made any progress, for what is there to think about?  Thus in addition I’ve again made a few drawings for them, a woman with a sack of coal on her head with a yard in the background, a silhouette of roofs and chimneys, and a woman at the wash-tub. You needn’t worry that I’ll undertake anything else for the time being apart from the drawings themselves — I must wait a little before doing trials with lithography until I have some money to get on with them. But I believe it could come to something.  From time to time I have a great longing to be in London again. I’d so very much like to know more about printing and drawing on wood.  I feel a power in me that I must develop, a fire that I may not put out but must fan, although I don’t know to what outcome it will lead me, and wouldn’t be surprised if it was a sombre one.  In times like these, what should one wish for? What is the happiest lot in these circumstances?  In some situations it’s better to be the vanquished than the victor, for example, better Prometheus than Jupiter. Anyway, it’s an old saying, ‘what will be will be’. To change the subject, do you know whose work has made a deep impression on me? I saw reproductions of Julien Dupré (is this a son of Jules Dupré???). One was of two reapers, the other, a splendid large woodcut from Monde illustré, of a peasant woman taking a cow into the meadow. It seemed to me outstanding, very energetic and very true to life. It perhaps resembles Pierre Billet, say, or Butin. 
       Then I also saw various figures by Dagnan-Bouveret, a beggar, a wedding party, The accident, The Garden of the Tuileries. Those two seem to me to be fellows who wrestle physically with nature, fellows who don’t weaken and aren’t afraid of dirtying their hands. You wrote to me about ‘The accident’ at the time, now I know it and find it very beautiful.  They perhaps don’t have the lofty quality, the almost religious emotion of Millet, at least not to the same degree as Millet himself; they perhaps don’t have his full, warm love, but even so how outstandingly good it is. Now admittedly I only know reproductions, but it seems to me that they can’t contain anything that wasn’t put into the original work itself.  By the way, it took a long time before I found Thomas Faed’s work beautiful, but these days I don’t hesitate about it any more, for instance, the Sunday in the backwoods of Canada — Home and the homeless — Worn out — The poor, the poor man’s friend, anyway, you know the series of aquatints published by Graves. Today I worked on old drawings from Etten, because I saw the pollard willows again in a similar leafless state here in the field, and what I had seen last year came to mind again.  Sometimes I long so much to do landscape, just as one would for a long walk to refresh oneself, and in all of nature, in trees for instance, I see expression and a soul, as it were. A row of pollard willows sometimes resembles a procession of orphan men.  Young corn can have something ineffably pure and gentle about it that evokes an emotion like that aroused by the expression of a sleeping child, for example. 
   The grass trodden down at the side of a road looks tired and dusty like the inhabitants of a poor quarter. After it had snowed recently I saw a group of Savoy cabbages that were freezing, and that reminded me of a group of women I had seen early in the morning at a water and fire cellar13 in their thin skirts and old shawls.  As for those figures that I wanted to lithograph, I think the most difficult thing is to find thirty or so that together will form some sort of whole — for that one has to draw considerably more than 30. If I first have them, reproduction will be a second step which may then be easier than if one had started reproducing before one had the whole. Perhaps, or rather certainly, you’ll have been here again before I’ve got as far as having them done, and then we can discuss this further.  Something similar for primary schools has already been made here, namely 24 lithographs by Schmidt Crans which I saw recently. A few of them are good, but you’ll understand, given the person who made them, that as a whole they’re rather faint-hearted. All the same, it seems that schools are keen to use them — but how deplorable it is that people are satisfied with something like that, especially for schools. Well, it’s the same with this as with everything else.  Still, old chap, read Le Nabab above all. It’s splendid. One could call that character the good scoundrel. Are there such people? I’m sure there are. There’s a lot of heart in those books by Daudet. For example, in Les rois en exil the character of the queen ‘with eyes of aquamarine’. Write again soon. How much good it does a person if one is in a gloomy mood to walk on the empty beach and look into the grey-green sea with the long white lines of the waves. Yet if one has a need for something great, something infinite, something in which one can see God, one needn’t look far. I thought I saw something — deeper, more infinite, more eternal than an ocean — in the expression in the eyes of a baby — when it wakes in the morning and crows — or laughs because it sees the sun shine into its cradle. If there is a ‘ray from on high’, it might be found there.  Adieu, old chap, with a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I just received your registered letter and thank you most cordially for it. What I want to begin with is this. Herewith a folder from the 1883 Xmas No. of The Graphic. Do read it carefully, it’s well worth the effort. What a colossal set-up, isn’t it? What huge sales. That said, what then? The following, among other things. Hubert Herkomer’s words2 are in singular contrast to those of The Graphic’s editors.  The latter say, ‘On referring to our books we find that besides our professional artists we have no less than Two thousand seven hundred and thirty friends scattered over the world, sending us sketches or elaborate drawings.’3  HH speaks of a: ‘DEARTH OF GOOD DRAUGHTSMEN.’4  And in general his words are the diametrical opposite of those of the publishers in this Xmas issue — the whole producing a result in the following form. 


Graphic publishers say 
“all right”.



H.H. says 
“all wrong”.


 Now also see something striking on page 4 of the folder I’m sending: The G. when strong enough to walk alone, rented one house and began to print with six machines.  I have every respect for this, I feel something holy here, something noble, something sublime. I’m now looking at that group of great artists5 and thinking of foggy London and the scurrying about in that small set-up. Deeper in my imagination I see the draughtsmen in their various studios setting to work with the best kind of enthusiasm. 
   I see Millais going up to C. Dickens with the first No. of The Graphic. Dickens was then in the evening of his life, he had a paralyzed foot, walked with a kind of crutch. Millais says, while showing Him the drawing by Luke Fildes, Homeless and hungry — the poor and vagabonds outside a night refuge — Millais says to Dickens, give him your Edwin Drood to illustrate, and Dickens says, ‘Very well’.  Edwin Drood was Dickens’s last work, and Luke Fildes, having got in touch with D. through those small illustrations, comes into his room on the day of his death — sees his empty chair standing there, and so it was that one of the old Nos. of The Graphic had that striking drawing  THE EMPTY CHAIR. Empty chairs — there are many, more will come, and sooner or later instead of Herkomer, Luke Fildes, Frank Holl, William Small &c. there will only be Empty chairs. And still the publishers and dealers, not listening to a prophecy like H.H.’s, will go on assuring us in words like those in the enclosed 
   folder that all is well and that we’re making very good progress. How hard-hearted they are, how mistaken, though, if they think they can fool everyone into believing that material greatness is of equal weight as moral greatness, and that without the latter anything good can be done. As with The Graphic, so with more, many more things in the sphere of art.  Moral greatness diminishes, material greatness comes in its place.  Whether the desired change will come? It seems to me that everyone must reflect on that for himself, but the old comparison speaks of a broad way ending in desolation, and of a narrow one leading to a different result. The Graphic began on the narrow way and has now moved to the broad one.  I saw the latest issue this morning. There was almost nothing good in it. I took an old, torn, dirty issue of 1873 from a pile of scrap paper at a Jewish bookseller’s this morning and am keeping almost everything in it.
   But as for me — what to do? A few years ago I went walking with Rappard outside Brussels at a spot they call the Vallée de Josaphat, an area where Roelofs lives, among others. There was a sandpit there where diggers were at work — there were women looking for dandelion leaves, a peasant was sowing — we looked at all this and at the time I was half despairing: will I ever succeed in making what I consider so beautiful? Now I’m no longer so despairing, now I can capture those peasants and women better than then, and through carrying on working patiently I can arrive at what I wanted, in a sense.  But what’s going on weighs heavily on me, and I don’t think of the magazines with pleasure and enthusiasm. The Graphic forgets to say that many in the group of artists are beginning to refuse to give their work, withdrawing more and more. Why? Because a painter works to do something good and has something honest in his heart that finds all that grandeur loathsome. What more shall I say? — repeat ‘What to do?’ once more. Carry on working, of course, but as if with a dark future.  Here in The Hague — there are clever, great men, I readily acknowledge that, but in many respects what a wretched state of affairs it is. What intriguing, quarrelling, envy. And in the personalities of the artists getting rich, who with Mesdag at their head set the tone, also unmistakable signs of material greatness replacing moral greatness.  I begin to feel in myself that if, for example, I went to England and tried right and left, I would indeed have a chance of finding a place. To achieve that was my ideal, was and is, despite everything, still what spurred me on to overcome the enormous initial difficulties. — — — But my heart becomes heavy at times when I think of what’s going on — my pleasure vanishes. I really want to do my best in my drawings, but all those editors and having to present oneself there — bah! I shudder at the thought. 
   You ask about my health. What I had last summer really has gone completely, but I’m a little dejected at present, which is combined with other moments, when I’m making progress with the work, when I feel very cheerful, so that I find it rather like being a soldier who doesn’t feel at home in the guardhouse and thinks to himself: why must I be here in the cooler when I would be more in my rightful place in the ranks?  I mean something is weighing on me, since I feel a power in myself which, due to the circumstances, can’t develop as it otherwise would, and the result is that I’m often wretched. A kind of internal battle over what I must do. Not so easy to resolve as may have appeared at first.  I wish I had a position through which I could make progress. Many positions that might lie within my reach would lead me to something entirely different from what I mean. They lie beyond my reach for, although I might be taken on initially, with time I wouldn’t be thought right for them. I would be dismissed and I would myself give notice, as with Goupil.  I mean, they’d want current events, the day’s news, whatever, for which someone like Adrien Marie or Godefroy Durand13 would be perfectly suitable. I begin to see ever more clearly that the illustrated magazines go along with the superficial stream, and I believe that they aren’t concerned with being as good as their duty dictates. No, filling the magazines with things that neither cost much nor take much trouble, now and again putting in something good, but produced in a cheap, mechanized way, apart from that filling their pockets with as much money as possible. I don’t think this is a wise course of action. I believe they’ll go bankrupt as a result and be bitterly sorry at the very end, still a long way off. But this doesn’t alter the fact that things are as they are. Renewing themselves — they never give it a thought. Suppose that The Graphic, L’Illustration, Vie Moderne published an issue containing feeble, insipid things. Nonetheless, umpteen cartloads and shiploads would be sold, the managers rub their hands and say, ‘It sells just as well like this, 
   no questions asked, they swallow it anyway’.  Yes, but if their lordships the managers could follow their publications and see how thousands eagerly pick up the magazine and then, when they put it aside, instinctively have a feeling of dissatisfaction and disappointment, maybe they’d be less keen to badger people. This isn’t the case at all, though, and as you see from the Graphic report there’s no lack of self-confidence. In the meantime, people have wormed their way in as employees who wouldn’t have appeared in the difficult but noble time. What Zola calls the triumph of mediocrity14 takes place: scoundrels, nobodies, replace workers, thinkers, artists, and no one even notices.  The public — yes, on the one hand they’re dissatisfied, but material greatness also garners applause all the same. But don’t forget that this is only a straw fire, and that those who applaud generally do so only because it has become the talk of the town. On the day after the party there’ll be an emptiness and silence, and indifference after all that noise. The Graphic will do Types of beauty (Large heads of women), says this prospectus, no doubt as a replacement for Heads of the people by Herkomer, Small and Ridley.  Very well, but some people will not admire the Types of beauty, and will think back with melancholy to the old Heads of the people (a series which has been terminated).  The Graphic say they’ll make Chromos!!!17 Give us back Swain’s studio. You see, Theo, old chap, it truly grieves me, 
   the whole thing is going wrong.  Listen, I would have counted it the greatest honour, an ideal, to have worked on what The Graphic started. What Dickens was as a writer, what the Household edition of his work was as a publication, that was what that sublime beginning of The Graphic was like. And now, everything’s gone — again the material in place of the moral. Do you know what I think of the folder I’m sending you? It’s just like the way of talking that, for example, Obach, the manager of G&C. in London, goes in for. And that is successful — yes, that is successful, yes, it’s listened to and it’s accepted. Do you know, old chap, what I think of this way of talking in this Graphic folder? It’s like Mesdag’s reasoning about the panorama at the time. I have respect for working, I despise neither Obach nor Mesdag, but there are things that I rate infinitely higher than that sort of energy.  I would like something more succinct, something simpler, something sounder; I would like more soul and more love and more heart. Rest assured that I will not and cannot shout out against it, that I will not oppose it. It’s just that it makes me sad, it takes away my pleasure, it upsets me, and I no longer know what I, for my part, should or should not do. 
   What sometimes saddens me is this — in the past, when I began, I thought when I’ve got this or that far I’ll get a position here or there, and I’ll be on a straight path and set for life. Now, though, something else has come up, and I fear, or rather expect, a kind of guardhouse instead of employment. I expect things like: yes, this and that in your work is all right (I doubt whether they really mean it), but you must understand that the kind of work you do is unusable; we need current events (vide19 The Graphic, we print on the Saturday what happened on the Thursday). See, Theo, old chap — I can’t make any TYPES OF BEAUTY — but I will do my best for HEADS OF THE PEOPLE. See, Theo, I would like to do the same as those who began The Graphic (though I don’t consider myself their equal), that is to take a chap or woman or child from the street and do that in my studio. But no, they’d ask: ‘Can you do chromos by electric light?’21  Anyway, instead of dealing with a way of thinking, a feeling, a goal like Dickens’s (The Graphic was like that originally), one is presented with a mode of seeing and thinking like Obach’s. That saddens me, and then I feel powerless.  Undertaking something oneself is possible only if one encounters interest and cooperation. This brings us to another area. Excuse me if I tell you my thoughts and continue to do so. If you don’t have time to write and don’t reply immediately, at least you’ll know when we meet again what preoccupies me, and perhaps we’ll find a passable path. I thought this folder from The Graphic was something through which one can say more clearly what one means, and that’s why I write this for the present. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours,  Vincent.  My dear Theo, Though I’ve nothing special to tell you, I wanted to write to you again. As against what I wrote to you, that I’m often heavy-hearted about many things, can’t see everything as progress, &c., there’s what I also said on a previous occasion: there are things that are worth doing one’s best for, either because they gain approval or because, just the opposite, they have their own raison d’être. Blessed is he who has found his work, says Carlyle, and that’s absolutely true. And as for me, when I say that I want to make figures from the people for the people, then it goes without saying that the course of events will influence me only indirectly, that is to the extent that my work is made harder or easier, but making the drawings themselves is my main preoccupation. And so, as against a feeling of dejection, there’s the fact that it’s a delight to work on something that becomes more interesting the deeper you get into it. I said in my last letter that I sometimes had a feeling of being in a sort of guardhouse or prison, by which I simply mean that there are many things I can’t pursue which I would like to — they’d only become possible if I could pay for them — but I don’t at all mean by this that I don’t appreciate the present or am discontented. Far from it. It’s precisely by doing what is attainable that one has a chance of working one’s way up, so be assured that if you ever know of work I could do for the illustrated magazines there, I would be happy to do my best for them.  When I write: I don’t think the illustrated magazines are going about it the right way, that’s no reason for me not to want to work for them. It’s just that I fear what I do wouldn’t suit them. If this is due to genuine mistakes, I’ll try to correct them, but if it was because of conception or mood in general, there’s little I could do about it. You’ll have received the drawing in a smaller format, and I repeat once more that if you like I’ll make a series in that size to try it out. 
   I now have two more drawings — one is a man reading the Bible2 and the other is a man saying his prayers before his midday meal, which is on the table. Both are most decidedly in what one might call an old-fashioned sentiment, they are ditto figures as the old man with his head in his hands.  The grace is the best, I believe, but they complement each other. In the one there’s a view through the window of snow-covered furrows.  My intention with these two and with the first old man is one and the same, namely to express the special mood of Christmas and New Year. At that time, in both Holland and in England, there’s still always a religious element, everywhere in fact, at least in Brittany and Alsace too. Leaving aside whether or not one agrees with the form, it’s something one respects if it’s sincere, and for my part I can fully share in it and even feel a need for it, at least in the sense that, just as much as an old man of that kind, I have a feeling of belief in something on high5 even if I don’t know exactly who or what will be there. I like what Victor Hugo said: religions pass, but God remains. And Gavarni also said a fine thing: the point is to grasp what does not pass in what passes. One of the things that will not pass is the something on high and belief in God, even if the forms change, a change as necessary as the renewal of greenery in the spring. But you will understand from one thing and another that my aim in these drawings is not to pay homage to the form but to show that I greatly respect the Christmas and New Year sentiment.  And if there’s any sentiment or expression in it, that’s because I myself share it. 
   What I feel more and more is that it’s difficult to discover the best way to work. There’s so much that is fine on the one side, and so much on the other side too, moreover so much that is wrong, that sometimes one doesn’t know which way to choose. But at all events one must work. Yet for my part I do not think that I couldn’t make a mistake, am too aware of many mistakes to be able to say: this or that is the right way, that is the wrong one. This goes without saying. But I’m not indifferent, I believe it’s wrong to be so, I believe that it’s a duty — even though one knows that one can’t get through the world without making mistakes, without remorse or sorrows — to try to do right. I once read somewhere, Some good must come by clinging to the right. What do I know of whether I’ll attain this or that goal — how can I know in advance whether or not the difficulties will be insuperable? One must work on in silence and await the outcome accordingly. If one prospect vanishes another will perhaps open up — there must be a prospect and a future too, even though its geography is unknown. The conscience is a man’s compass, and although the needle deviates sometimes, although above all one detects inaccuracies in one’s orientation, one must nevertheless do one’s best to set one’s course by it.  I must copy out something for you that I had in mind when working on that old man, though it doesn’t apply to it literally, since it isn’t nighttime in the drawing, for example.  Oft, in the stilly night. Oft in the stilly night,  Ere slumber’s chain has bound me, Fond memory brings the light Of other days around me; The smiles, the tears, Of boyhood’s years, The words of love then spoken; The eyes that shone, Now dimm’d and gone,  The cheerful hearts now broken! Thus, in the stilly night,  Ere slumber’s chain hath bound me, Sad memory brings the light Of other days around me. Laurillard after Moore. 
   When I remember all The friends, so link’d together, I’ve seen around me fall, Like leaves in wintry weather; I feel like one Who treads alone Some banquet-hall deserted, Whose lights are fled, Whose garlands dead, And all but he departed! Thus, in the stilly night,  Ere slumber’s chain hath bound me, Sad memory brings the light Of other days around me.b Well, I hope that you too will be able to enjoy something of nature in the coming days, either in the appearance of the short winter days or in the winter figures. For how very different passers-by on the street look in winter and in summer.  I’ve studied your information as to the Buhot paper sent. If you think it advisable for me to do some work on it, I would need a few sheets, and I take it that they’re perhaps made in suitable formats so that I can adapt to them. This paper is not obtainable here, otherwise I would already have tried it. After reading your explanation I’m also left with the question: if one takes a photograph of the drawing, and then transfers the photo to zinc, is it only the drawings done on this particular paper that are suitable for this, and isn’t it possible to reproduce all drawings in black and white, even if they’re on ordinary paper? Also: doesn’t the photographer then have it in his power to reduce the format, should the drawing be larger than desirable for the format of the magazine? The latter is certainly what I would deduce from some American reproductions that appeared in Scribner’s Magazine. Well, adieu, I hope you’ll write again towards the twentieth. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your registered letter in good order, and thank you warmly for sending it. From your letter I saw that you’re busy with the inventory. Good luck with it, no doubt it’s a fearsome grind.  How I wish we could spend a couple of Christmas days together, for instance — I would also dearly like to have you in my studio once more.  I, too, have been toiling quite hard recently, precisely because I was full of the Christmas feeling, and feeling isn’t enough, one must bring it into one’s work.  So I’m now occupied with two large heads of an orphan man, with his white beard and old-fashioned, old top hat. This chap has the sort of old, lively face that one would wish for beside a cosy Christmas fire.  Harper has published an issue for Xmas done by some painters calling themselves The tile club. Boughton has a print in it. The finest of them are drawings by Abbey — they mainly show scenes from olden times when the Dutch founded New York under the name New Amsterdam.  I believe that these drawings are reproduced using that process you described — on the paper that Buhot sent a sample of. I must compare these American drawings with the prints in Vie Moderne.  I have every hope that I can learn this, and who knows, perhaps next year we’ll be able to do some experiments. 
   As long as you’re as busy as you are now, I’ll do my very best to make drawings with that in mind. Then when you’re not so busy I’ll have some more information to ask from you or from Buhot.  But I see clearly enough that the process is rewarding, that if the drawing is good one is virtually assured of good reproduction. So working on the drawings is the main thing.  As for lithography, because I’ve been present several times during the printing and the preparation of the stone, I’m seriously considering making a lithograph without the aid of paper or anything else, that is simply drawing straight onto the stone itself.  For however beautiful I find those sheets in Harper’s Xmas number, for example, or in Vie Moderne, there’s still something mechanical about them, something of a photograph or photogravure, and I would rather see an ordinary lithograph by Daumier or Gavarni or Lemud. Anyway, a steady drawing hand is required for both the one and the other, and for the most part that’s what it depends on. I fear that the new process is one of those things that isn’t completely satisfactory, and is in fact a little too sweet. I mean, an ordinary etching, an ordinary wood engraving or an ordinary lithograph has a charm of originality that can’t be replaced by anything mechanical.  So too with engraving — the reproduction through photogravure of the needlework school by Israëls, say, or the painting by Blommers7 or the one by Artz, is superb, as published by G&Cie. But if this process were to completely replace true engraving I think the ordinary engravings would eventually be missed, with all their shortcomings and imperfections. 
   Rappard is still ill, although the crisis is past; his father writes that he’s very weak. What is it? I don’t know — perhaps brain fever or infection? His father says nothing about that.  Well, I hope that you’ll still be able to enjoy Christmas — still get to go for a walk and have a pleasant time.  But I fear you’ll be deep in the inventory. Still, there’s always something cheerful about working, even when the work itself isn’t that enjoyable.  My best wishes to you. If you can, write again, but if you’re too busy I’ll understand completely, then you must make up for lost time later with a few descriptions of Montmartre or something like that. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Before the year ends, I feel a need to thank you again for all your help and friendship. I’ve sent you almost nothing for a considerable time, but I’m saving up for when you come some day. I’m sorry that I haven’t managed to make a saleable drawing this year — I really don’t know why it is that I haven’t managed this.  I wish you were in the studio once more. I believe I wrote to you recently that at present I’m occupied with large heads because I felt I needed to study the structure of a skull and the composition of a physiognomy more intimately.  The work is most absorbing, and the other day I found some things that I had long looked for in vain. Anyway, you’ll see everything when you come.  The past few days I’ve had a constant, troublesome toothache that sometimes affects my right eye and ear, and may perhaps involve the nerves too. One becomes indifferent to many things when one has toothache, but it’s curious that Daumier’s drawings, for example, are so striking that one almost forgets about the toothache. I have two more sheets by him, ‘Excursion train’, 
   passengers with pale faces and black coats in raw weather who get to the platform too late. Women with howling infants between them.  Do you know the little book Croquis à la plume written by the draughtsman Henry Monnier (who invented Mr Prudhomme)? In it I read a ‘journey by diligence’, amazingly true to life.  You’ll still be busy with your inventory and I shan’t hold you up. I heartily wish you the very best in the New Year.  Will we have more luck making saleable drawings in the new year, or finding work for an illustrated magazine, say?  I continue to believe one thing: wrestling with nature is not working in vain, and though I don’t know what the result will be, there will be a result.  I do wish you were in the studio again, not because I can’t make progress or don’t know what to do, but mainly because I’m so afraid that you may think I’m not making progress. And although I can’t show you a definitive result as yet, you would see that it’s gradually developing. And you would see that I’m searching for a great thing.
   I agree entirely with what you wrote recently, ‘there comes a time when one has mastered drawing to the degree that the format becomes immaterial and one has the proportions in one’s head, so that one can work just as well on a large or a small scale.’  Not only do I agree about that, but on top of that I believe that one can and must raise oneself to a level where one has mastered composition, effects, chiaroscuro to the extent that one can master the most diverse themes and subjects in the field one has chosen — such as today doing a 3rd-class waiting room, tomorrow a rainy day in a poor neighbourhood, another time an almshouse for old men, then a pub or a soup kitchen.  I haven’t got that far yet, but perhaps it’s a long process precisely because I search for the root or origin of many things at the same time. Thanks for all your loyal friendship, old chap, which I again experienced the whole year long. May I, for my part, be able to give you some pleasure in turn. One day I’ll succeed in that. In thought a handshake, write again when you can find a moment — best wishes once more, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, It’s New Year’s Eve and I feel so much like having another word with you. When I wrote my last letter I spoke to you about large heads that I was working on. I was carrying out an experiment at the time, the first results of which I can now report to you, since the day before yesterday, yesterday and today I’ve had models for two drawings.  When I made the lithographs, I was struck by the fact that the lithographic crayon was very pleasant to work with, and I thought of making drawings with it.  It has one drawback, though, which you’ll understand — it’s greasy, so one can’t rub it out in the normal way. Working with it on paper, one mostly has to do without the only thing that one can use to erase on the stone itself, namely the scraper, which can’t be used with enough force on the paper because it goes through it.  But I had the idea of first doing a drawing in carpenter’s pencil and then working in and over it with lithographic crayon, because (owing to the greasiness of the material) it takes on pencil, whereas ordinary crayon does not, or only poorly. Having done the sketch in this way, one can confidently work in the lithographic crayon where necessary without having to search or rub out a lot. So I went quite a long way towards finishing my drawings in pencil, as far in fact as I possibly could with it. Then I fixed them and made them matt with milk. And then drew over them again in lithographic crayon, where the greatest strengths were, reinforcing them here and there with a brush or pen with lampblack, and working with white body-colour in the light passages.
   Now I have a drawing of an old man sitting reading done in this way, with light that falls on the bald head, the hand and the book.  And a second one, a head of an injured man with a bandage. The model I had for that one really did have an injury to his head and a bandage on his left eye. Just like the head of a soldier of the old guard in the retreat from Russia, say.  When I compare these two heads with the others I’ve done, there’s a big difference in the strength of the effect.  So I have hopes that drawings done in this way will be suitable for reproduction using the process you’ve described to me.  Especially if the paper you sent isn’t absolutely essential for reproduction.  And if it’s essential, then I believe that I would sooner get a better effect than a worse one with the same ingredients on the grey paper. When I looked at what Buhot had scratched on the one sample, I saw right away that the black was of a very deep tone, and I can understand that this is really essential for reproduction, where photogravure and galvanoplasty are involved.
   So I immediately tried to see which black I could use, while still sketching in my normal way.  I tried ink first, but I wasn’t satisfied with that, although I believe that in that way the effects will be better with lithographic crayon.  Well, I’m not writing about this in order to bother you in the midst of your busy days. I’m not in a hurry, and in fact it would be very welcome if I have some more time to investigate further.  But I’m writing this to you so that you’ll know that I’m toiling away heart and soul to get it good and usable.  What people call Black and White is actually Painting in black. Painting in the sense that one puts into a drawing the depth of effect and the rich gradations of tone that a painting should have. You rightly said not long ago that every colourist has an individual colour spectrum.  This is also the case with Black and White. Yet fundamentally it’s one and the same. One must be able to go from the highest lights to the deepest shadows, and do so with a few simple ingredients.  Some draughtsmen have a nervous manner that gives their technique something of the singularity of the sound a violin makes, such as Lemud, Daumier, Lançon. Others, like Gavarni and Bodmer, are more reminiscent of the piano. Is this how it seems to you? Millet is perhaps a solemn organ. 
   2 January That’s as far as I got on New Year’s Eve, I was hoping your letter would have arrived. If you haven’t yet written, please do so, for I have nothing left. But you must be very busy. I’ve now done some more sketches in lithographic crayon. It’s almost as nice to work with as paint, and one can get a great strength and depth of black with it. I’m really yearning to speak to you again, I have so many plans — not all of which will be implemented, but not all of which will fail either. And with respect to them, I really have so little time to think things through and I have too little idea of how things stand to be able to decide on their feasibility myself, so I greatly need to discuss them with you. Above all, don’t be concerned that I haven’t yet done anything saleable this year — you’ve sometimes said that to me yourself, and if I now say it I do so because I see a few things being attainable in future which I didn’t see before. I sometimes think back to a few years ago when I came to this city. I imagined that the painters here would form a sort of circle or society in which warmth and open-heartedness and a certain unity would prevail. To me this was in the nature of things, and I didn’t know that it could be different.  I wouldn’t like to give up the ideas about this that I had when I came here, even if I have to modify them and make a distinction between what is and what could be. I can’t believe that it’s a natural state of affairs to have so much coolness and discord. What is the cause??? I don’t know, and I’m not called on to investigate this, but I for one make it my principle not to do two things. The first is that one shouldn’t get into disputes; instead one should try to foster peace, both for others and for oneself. And the other thing one shouldn’t do, in my opinion, is try to be something in society other than a painter if one is a painter. As a painter, one must leave aside other social ambitions and not produce the same thing as the fellows who live in Voorhout and Willemspark &c. For in the old, smoke-stained, dark studios there was an intimacy and something real that was infinitely better than what’s threatening to take its place. Should you see progress in my work when you come again, then I would like to be able to continue in the same way as hitherto. Namely, that I can quietly 
   carry on working without bothering about other people. As long as there’s bread in the house and I have a little in my pocket to pay for models, what more could I want? My enjoyment lies in my work getting better — and that absorbs me more and more. Now, old chap, if you haven’t yet written, write soon. I’m rather hard up.  Again, my best wishes for the New Year. 
   I received a good letter from home. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I wrote to you yesterday, but I’m doing so again today to report the safe arrival of your letter and to thank you for it, and to tell you that what you wrote raised my spirits. I was a bit concerned that, because you’ve seen so little of my work recently, this might make you think that I’d begun to slacken off. I have in fact been slogging away lately, and am still wrapped up in various things in which I begin to see light as to how to do them, but which I haven’t yet got the hang of as I would like. In my last letter I told you I was experimenting in Black and White with lithographic crayon. You speak too highly of me in your letter, but the fact that you think highly of me is an added reason for me to try not to be entirely unworthy of it. And as for my saying I believed I had made some progress through those experiments, it may be that I can’t see my own work properly. Perhaps it’s a step forward, perhaps not. Tell me your opinion about that based on the accompanying two studies, which I made in the past few days, together with some others. 
   While I search for a more powerful process than the one I’ve worked with up to now, I try to be guided to some extent by the English reproductions made using the process you described — together with the black scratches Buhot made on the sample paper — as to the strength of black. And if you get a chance, speak to an expert about whether it would be possible to reproduce drawings like these (as distinct from the second question of whether these or similar ones were to their particular taste). As for their sentiment, I would like to know what YOU think about that, because, as I said, I myself can’t judge whether there’s more in them or not. Or rather, my position is that for my part I’d rather see studies like these, even though they’re unfinished and even if much is completely neglected, than drawings that have a subject, because through them I get a vivid memory of nature itself. You’ll understand what I mean. True studies have something of life itself, and the person who makes them will respect not himself but nature in them, and hence prefer the study to what he may make of it later. Unless something entirely different arises from it as the final outcome of many studies, namely the type distilled from many individuals. That is the highest art, 
   and in that art is sometimes above nature — — — as, for instance, in Millet’s sower, in which there is more soul than in an ordinary sower in the field. But what I’d like to know from you is whether you think that this way of working would perhaps remove some of the objections you had to pencil. They’re a few ‘heads of the people’, and my intention would be to find a large number like these to try to form a sort of entity that wouldn’t be entirely unworthy of the title ‘heads of the people’. Through working hard, old chap, I hope to make something good one day. I haven’t got it yet, but I’m hunting it and fighting for it, I want something serious, something fresh — something with soul in it! Onward, onward. You’ll see clearly enough from what I’ve said above that I’m more eager to put together a serious work for reproduction than to have the satisfaction of seeing one drawing printed some day. But any information and tips as to processes are very welcome. In the window at G&Cie I saw a large etching by Fortuny, An anchorite, as well as his two beautiful The dead Kabyle and Watching over the dead man3 — then I deeply regretted saying to you not long ago that I didn’t find Fortuny beautiful4 – this I found extremely beautiful. Well, you’ll understand that yourself. 
   It’s the same with Boldini too. But that seriousness that Fortuny had, for instance, in those three etchings is just what’s missing with many of his followers, who completely follow in his wake with a manner for which F. set the example in, say, ‘The choice of a model’5 &c.  And that is the direct opposite of the sombre, noble quality of Brion, of Degroux, Israëls &c. When you can, do send me an issue of the current Vie Moderne, look for one with reproductions like the ones you wrote about. The magazine is nowhere to be found here (and what I have ((a few issues)) is years old). I’ll show you more when you come, sooner or later — and then we can talk about the future. You know well enough how little suited I am to approaching either dealers or art lovers, and moreover how it goes against the grain for me. I so dearly wish that we could always carry on as in the past, but I’m often so sad about having to trouble you again and again. But who knows whether in time it mightn’t be possible for you to interest someone or other who could take the load off your shoulders that you’ve borne in the most difficult time. That could be done when it’s clearly evident that my work is serious, at which time it will have more appeal than this. I’m too fond of my very simple life to want to change it, but later on we’ll have to incur greater expenses to do greater things. I believe I’ll always work with a model a lot — always and always. And I must get things to the point where not everything rests on your shoulders. This is only a beginning — later you’ll get fine things from me, old chap! For the time being, let me know whether you think some of the objections to using pencil alone could be removed somewhat by using crayon as well. Don’t you also agree that by making these drawings I may also indirectly learn things about lithography proper? Adieu, thanks again for your letter, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. Dear brother, I’m sending you herewith a few more studies. And here’s an idea that I’ve been thinking about in the past few days. If you don’t find it tedious to see such sketches, I think it would be a good idea if I sent you 60 sketches, say, in a small portfolio sometime. Then you could look through them at your ease in your room. And the advantage would be that when you come, sooner or later, you would already have seen some things that I did last year. Otherwise we’d have to go through these studies very hastily if you only came for a short time. 
   But if you, too, think it would be a good idea to look through them in advance, so that I should send them in the next few days, then I take it I can count on your bringing them back this summer, say, can’t I?, because I’ll have to work from them later.  My next work depends in part on the studies staying together. Anyway — it may amuse you — because some of the orphan men, for example, are perhaps rather typical. Anyway, let me know about this. 
   Because I had to pay for some things at New Year I’ve now actually run out of money already, at least I have very little left. Try, if you can, to send before rather than after the tenth and I’ll be obliged to you. Adieu, old chap, I hope that the sketches will be more or less to your taste. With a handshake. Ever yours Vincent The drawings I’d like to send you are ditto figures like the lithographs, all sorts — men, women, children. My dear Theo When I read your letter this morning I was deeply touched by what you wrote. These are matters of which the world sometimes says, ‘Why should he get involved?’, and yet it isn’t so much our own act as the circumstances that compel us to do so. And once we’ve grasped the situation, a compassion can be awakened that is so unfathomably deep that we no longer hesitate. And in you — I believe it is so — and what can I say other than that it seems to me that we must follow our impulses in such cases? Victor Hugo says, ‘Over and above reason there is conscience.’2 There are things that we feel to be good and true, although from the point of view of intellect and calculation there remains much that is inexplicable and obscure in them. And even though now, in the society in which we find ourselves, such actions are regarded as ill-considered or reckless or foolish or I don’t know what all — what shall we say once the hidden forces of sympathy and love have been awakened deep inside us? And should we be unable to use other arguments entirely to refute those that society customarily invokes against letting oneself be led by feeling and against acting impulsively — refuting isn’t the point, and he who has retained a belief in a God sometimes hears the gentle voice of conscience, which he would then be well advised to follow with the naivety of a child. Without talking about it to the outside world more than one can help. 
   When someone has a meeting like that, it’s to be expected that he’ll experience conflict, especially conflict with himself, because one sometimes literally doesn’t know what one should or should not do. Yet isn’t this conflict, and even the mistakes into which one will sometimes fall, better, and doesn’t it develop us more than systematically shutting out emotions? This last is what makes many so-called strong spirits in reality weak spirits, in my view. You have my sympathy in this, and should you think it desirable, given that I too am faced by realities and can tell you what has befallen me since we last talked this over, to hear a thing or two about it, or if you want to talk about the future or confer about anything at all, I’m always entirely at your disposal. The fact that you write that you’re thinking of coming to Holland before too long is very welcome news to me. Persevering is the main issue in love once one has really started. That is if the love is requited, for if it’s definitely not requited then it’s a case in which one is literally absolutely powerless. Anyway. I thank you for your trust, and when I think it over I’m fairly at ease about the outcome. Such a thing isn’t ‘passion’, because an unfathomably deep compassion is involved. Nor do I believe that it’s something that makes you unsuited to thinking about other matters; on the contrary, a thing like that has a serious nature that awakes and strengthens all the faculties, and 
   can increase energy rather than decrease it. So you won’t hold it against me if I say one or two things about the drawings. It really pleases me that you found the old man’s head3 ‘true’ — the model is wonderfully true, I have more drawings of him. Today one that I drew with lithographic crayon. Then I tipped a bucket of water over the drawing and began to model with a brush in the soaking wet. In this way one gets very delicate tones if it works, for it’s a dangerous method that can turn out wrong on occasion. But if it works, the result is very ‘unburred’, delicate tones of black that most resemble an etching. In this way I also have a woman’s head, against the light, thus in tone with glancing lights on the profile &c. YOU ALSO RECEIVED THE SECOND ROLL, DIDN’T YOU, IN WHICH THERE WERE 5 MORE HEADS (sent from here on 5 or 6 January, I think) — as well as the first two. When you’ve had them for a while, I believe that you’ll find the same in them as in the first two, for there must be something of nature in them, since I really wrest them from nature, and I work from the model from beginning to end. I have a great desire to show you the studies — not because I’m content with my own work but because, though far from satisfied with it, I nonetheless see that it’s taking shape, and that something will naturally develop from it that will have some character. What struck me most when I came to the city was, for instance, the Geest district and those neighbourhoods. And it’s gaining substance little by little — but what a job to see something like that through. 
   Today I saw photos after drawings by Barnard, figures from Dickens, the original drawings of which I saw in London at the time. There’s a power in them like that in Nicolaas Maes, for example, but an entirely modern feeling and approach. That kind of thing makes me so enthusiastic and thus cheers me up, because I imagine models from here as they’d appear if they were drawn in that way, and then naturally I say to myself, onward! and keep on working until we’ve got the hang of the Black and White. It’s the same in art and in love, one is swung between ‘I’ve had it for a long time’ and ‘I’ll never have it’, as Michelet puts it. So one goes from melancholy to cheerfulness and enthusiasm, and this will always remain and the swings will only get stronger. Victor Hugo speaks of ‘like a lighthouse whose beam flashes on and off’10 and that’s how it is too. If you received my letter of 5 or 6 January with the second roll, you will recall that I was already running short then. And now today I had to pay the house rent and 3 models I had had to keep waiting, and I also absolutely had to have various drawing materials. I’m working very hard at present and I mustn’t stop, but the models are literally eating me out of house and home. In short, it would be very, very desirable if I could have a little extra. Would that be possible? I hesitate to ask because you’ve just written to me about one thing and another, and I understand so well how you yourself have cares as a result, which I respect and feel with you. But my position is that I’ve got a little behind precisely because I carried on working all the time, and even if I received the money now I would have to pay out more than half. I cannot live more thriftily than we do. Where economies could be made, we’ve economized, but the work is expanding just now, particularly in recent weeks, and I’m almost losing control, of the costs involved, that is. Is there a possibility that I could receive a little more soon? I believe you’ll understand when you see the studies. Well, forgive me for raising the subject, but I have little choice. I’ve got behind with the day-to-day expenses, and that means that in the last days of the 10 I’m always absolutely broke. In any event, write soon and be fully assured of my sympathy as regards what you write about, adieu, old chap, a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, What you write about has literally not been out of my thoughts since I received your letter. And I’m writing again precisely because the matter preoccupies me so much. In cases like this one is faced by a patient who is ill in both body and soul. So it’s doubly serious. And financial help with the necessities of life etc. isn’t enough to bring about complete recovery, for the very best and most effective medicine is still love and a home. At least that’s what I felt last winter, and since then — now, for instance — far more so, precisely because the experience made clear to me what my feelings were also telling me. Maintaining a life above water is a great and fine thing, but it’s also very difficult and requires a lot of care. Making a home for the homeless, well, that’s something that must be good, whatever the world may say, it cannot be wrong. And yet it’s often seen as some sort of crime. I couldn’t help thinking and thinking again about it. How will people take it? Will it bring you into conflict with the world? That, too, is a question in my mind that I can’t answer, because I don’t yet know the circumstances well enough. And there’s something else, which is actually the reason for this letter and which I wanted to suggest you consider and which you’ve probably thought of yourself. Something like this is a long-term business. But I do think it possible that you’ll soon see the reward for your care, although the complete recovery in body and soul of a constitution that has had such a shock really is something 
   that will take years. The woman and the children are with me at the moment. There’s a big difference when I think back to last year. The woman is stronger and sturdier, has lost a great, a very great deal of that harried look. The little child is as charming, healthy and cheerful a little fellow as you can imagine. He crows like a cockerel — has nothing but the breast yet is fat and plump. And the poor little girl — you can see from the drawing3 that the deep misery of the past hasn’t been wiped away yet, and I often worry about that, but still, she’s already very different from last year — then it was very, very bad, and now there’s already something truly childlike in her. Anyway, though not yet completely normal, the situation is better than I would have dared hope for last year. And when I now reflect, would it have been better if the mother had had a miscarriage, or if the child had withered and wasted away for lack of mother’s milk, and if that girl had been left more and more unclean and neglected, and the woman herself in who knows what wretched, near indescribable state? — see, then I may not hesitate and I say, onward in good heart. Something simple — truly motherly — is coming in the woman, and as that strengthens she will be saved.
   And how is progress made??? Not through doctors or through unusual remedies. Through the sense of one’s own home, through a regular, motivated life. Not by sparing oneself a great deal, for that cannot be done, but because the harried heart has more rest, even during hard and tedious work. With this case that I know intimately before me as a reality, I come back to what I wanted to say. It seems to me that you should pay special attention to the surroundings of the woman you write about if you want to see some benefit. It would be desirable for her to be somewhere other than in an empty room in a hotel or something like that, and for her to be in more domestic surroundings. Think about this, for I believe it’s an important thing. She needs to be distracted by very ordinary everyday things that keep her occupied. Solitude or idleness is absolutely fatal. She should be able to talk to good people. In short, a domestic circle with nothing out of the ordinary would be wonderful. Occupy herself with children, say. I think it rather a pity that she has no child, in my view that makes the case even more critical.
   Yes, I believe that the most practical thing you can do is to put her in a domestic circle. I believe that the main consideration for you at the moment is — this life must be saved — and that unselfishly you think more of her than of yourself. For my part, last year I knew of only one home for her, namely with me, and if I could have done something else I wouldn’t have taken her into my house immediately, precisely in order to avoid unpleasantnesses that couldn’t then be avoided. Unable to do otherwise, I didn’t hesitate though. And all in all everything has gone well so far. But with you the position is different, and perhaps you can take her, the person you write about, somewhere for the time being where she’ll be calm and safe until she’s fully recovered. I fear that it may be a long-term business, her recovery, and moreover, if it can be avoided one needn’t sin against society’s prejudices, which simply do exist. If it can’t be avoided, then what carries most weight must outweigh the rest, and this summer I would rather have sinned against all possible prejudices, even if there were more, than leave the woman without a roof and a hearth. But in your case everything can and should take place more calmly, it seems to me, and if I were you I’d provide her with a solid home. Not alone in a room, with no company. For her own good, and not because you want to spirit her away or keep her concealed, but for her it’s essential that emotions and shocking things are avoided as far as possible, and the sooner she’s in normal, everyday occupations and surroundings, the better. 
   Well, if you could take her in immediately, I wouldn’t speak of it. Yet I fear that’s not possible and you yourself wouldn’t immediately agree. I’m very agitated and I think of you all the time. Just now I did another drawing for which the woman posed. Listen, old chap, to put it briefly, it has been my experience this year that while there are hard, very hard, moments of care and trouble, it’s infinitely better to live with a woman and children than without.  So if you continue to think that this person is the woman for whom you want to live, I regard it as a happy thing for you. And then it’s precisely through love persevered with that she will bloom again. But it’s always desirable to get to know each other first, that’s more orderly and more prudent. And I too would have done that if it could have been arranged, even though I thought, I’ll stay with this person for ever. But there was no home immediately open to her except mine. Anyway, it’s the circumstances that one must take into account, and sometimes one can’t avoid giving offence. I don’t in the least want to advise you to give it up, since you write that you love her, but I believe we agree that it’s good to be careful vis-à-vis the world, which otherwise sometimes ruins everything. 
   And so, be careful. For the present the recovery is the main concern, and the other is secondary. Well then, I believe nothing will be better for her than to spend each day in a quiet circle. Don’t you know someone among your friends who would be willing to help and take her in for the time being? For, I repeat, if she’s alone in a room, with no distraction or occupation, then I believe that could be quite fatal for her. And a kind of hospital (ordinary or private) where she had company would perhaps be preferable, provided you visited her often. It may be that all this has already been arranged; I write about it just because I don’t know anything definite in this regard. I wish I knew when you were coming. If you come and are able, bring the old studies with you. As for my writing to ask whether you could send me a little more, well, I’m a little worried and wish it was possible, but don’t let her go short for my sake. And be assured that because of what you write I’ll gladly redouble my efforts to make progress, so that the burden on you is lightened. But that’s just the thing: working hard sometimes actually costs money, because one has more outgoings. Write soon, for I’m truly longing for news of you. My blessing in everything. Rappard is getting better, I have a letter from him. I’m busy with work, still doing various Heads. Adieu, with a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
   You’ll say that I’m spending a lot of time writing, I can’t help it, for you’ve confided in me, so I want to tell you that this didn’t fail to touch me.  It’s an odd thing about cases of this kind that it’s so extremely difficult to know how far one should go. You will experience this too. One asks oneself, should I help this woman and otherwise see only a friend in her, or should I definitely choose this woman as my wife with whom I want to live always? Is she the one? Or is she not? You see, I believe that you haven’t avoided this conflict, or perhaps you’re still in it. For were it to be otherwise, it would seem to me rather unnatural. At any rate I felt that conflict, and it was so difficult that for my part I couldn’t entirely answer those questions when circumstances forced me to make a decision. Because I thought, I don’t have the means to maintain two separate households, but perhaps I have enough for one, and so I must tell her how things stand: what I might be able to do and what I certainly couldn’t do. Perhaps we’ll be able to get by together, but if we don’t live together I won’t have enough. With you it may take a different form while still being the same conflict, and I remember a remark of yours last year that I thought very right and true: ‘marrying is such a funny thing’. Yes, by Jove, it certainly is. You said to me then, don’t marry her, and I conceded to you that the circumstances were such that there was good reason not to speak of that for the time being. 
   And now you know that I haven’t spoken further of that, but also that she and I have remained true to each other. And precisely because I can’t say that you were wrong when you said ‘don’t marry her’, I ask you to consider these words of yours, and indeed believe that you’ve thought about them, for it isn’t I who says this but you yourself. And I remind you of this only because I believe that it was indeed good that it didn’t happen immediately. So don’t let go of this thought, for it’s good for love to ripen so that marrying becomes very much a secondary matter. That is safer, and no one suffers harm as a result. I wanted to say one thing to you in the beginning, which you’ll understand anyway. Whether or not this puts you in difficulties, I respect the noble feelings that prompted you to help, and because I respect that I hope that if you do run up against difficulties, large or small, you’ll think me worthy of your confidence. Yet I do NOT view the matter with melancholy, but with every hope of a good outcome, namely happiness for you and for her. But once again — I consider it likely that a crisis will come sooner or later, consisting of a kind of mutual disappointment — if there was a child, it would be like a lightning conductor for the two of you. Now there isn’t one in your case and so, above all when the crisis comes — not now but later — trust me then and talk to me. See, for that’s where there are rocks where many a love has foundered alas and could have been saved. Once one has surmounted those rocks there’s plain sailing ahead. Although I’m busy writing to you, I’m busy working too. I can’t say how much I long to discuss many things with you. Tomorrow I’ll be getting a sou’wester for the heads. Heads of fishermen, old and young, that’s what I’ve been thinking about for a long time and I had already done one, but then later I couldn’t get hold of a sou’wester again. Now I’m going to have one of my own, an old one that many gales and seas have swept over. My dear Theo. The more I reflect upon it, the deeper the impression made on me by your last letter. In broad outline (leaving aside the difference between the two people in question), on a cold, merciless pavement a sombre, sorrowful figure of a woman appeared before you and before me, and neither you nor I passed her by, but both of us stopped and followed the promptings of our human heart. Such an encounter has something of an apparition about it, at least if one thinks back one sees a pale face, a sorrowful look like an Ecce Homo1 against a dark background; everything else disappears. That is the sentiment of an Ecce Homo and in reality; the same thing is in the expression, but here it’s a woman’s face.  Later — things are definitely different — but one doesn’t forget that first moment.  Below an English figure of a woman (by Paterson) is the name Dolorosa, which pretty well expresses it. I’m thinking of the two women now, and at the same time I thought of a drawing by Pinwell, The sisters, in which I find that ‘Dolorosa’.  That drawing shows two women in black in a dark room. One has just come home and is hanging her coat on the hatstand. The other briefly smells a primrose on the table while picking up a white piece of needlework.  That Pinwell is reminiscent of Feyen-Perrin — in his earlier period — his work also recalls Thijs Maris, but with a yet purer feeling. He was a poet, as strong as could be, he saw the sublime in the most ordinary, everyday things. His work is rare, I saw little by him, but that little was so beautiful that now, 10 years later, it has remained just as clear in my mind as when I first became acquainted with it.  At that time it was said of that group of draughtsmen ‘It’s too good to last’. You can see from Herkomer’s words that sadly this has proved to be right, but it isn’t dead yet, and in both literature and art it will be difficult to find a better attitude than the one from those days.  I often felt low in England for various reasons but those, the Black and White and Dickens, are things that make up for it all.
   I think your meeting with this woman is likely to take your thoughts back many times to the period 10 or even 20 years ago, or still further back. In short, I mean you will rediscover yourself in her, a part of your life that you had almost forgotten, namely the past, and I don’t know whether, when you’ve been with her for a year, you’ll see the present through the same eyes as, for instance, before you knew her.  I speak from my own experience, not that I reject everything to do with the present day, far from it, but still it seems to me that something from the past that was good and should have been kept is going, in art particularly, but also in life itself.  Perhaps I’m expressing things too vaguely, but I can’t put it another way — I don’t know myself what it is exactly, but it wasn’t only the Black and White that changed direction and strayed from the healthy, noble beginnings.  Rather, in general a kind of scepticism and indifference and coldness prevails, despite all the activity.  But all this is too vague and ill-defined. I don’t think about it all that much in fact, because I’m thinking about my drawings and have no time to go into it.  Still busy with heads this week, women’s heads mainly — with bags, among other things.  Have you ever seen anything by Boyd Houghton? He is one from the beginning of The Graphic who, though little known (he’s now dead), occupies a place of his own.  I thought of him when you wrote about the Barricade by Daumier. At the time he also did the pétroleuses and barricades in Paris. But later on he went to America and I know, among other things, drawings of Shakers by him, and a Mormon church, and Indian women10 &c., and emigrants.
   In a barricade scene, for example, he can have something ghostly, or rather something mysterious like Goya. He also treated the American subjects in that way, namely Goya-like, but then sometimes all at once something runs underneath that recalls Meryon because of its extraordinary austerity. His woodcuts could almost pass for etchings. Too good to last, they say, but it’s precisely because of that, because it’s rare, that the good lasts. It isn’t produced every day — it will never be obtained mechanically, but what there is of it is there, and that won’t go away but remain. And even if later another kind of good comes, the first will still keep its value. So in my opinion one shouldn’t lament the fact that this or that hasn’t become general; even if it doesn’t become general, whatever there is of the good or beautiful still exists. What’s the position these days with the etchings Cadart began years ago? Has that also proved to be Too good to last? I know well enough that many etchings, and beautiful ones at that, are published these days too. But I mean the old series Société des Aquafortistes that included The two brothers by Feyen-Perrin13 and the Sheep pasture by Daubigny14 and the Bracquemonds15 and so many others — have they retained their power or have they gone weak? Even if they are weaker, what there is — doesn’t that already have enough substance to remain for ever, thus rather disproving the words too good to last?  What the etching needle could do was shown by Daubigny, Millet, Feyen-Perrin, and many others, just as The Graphic &c. showed what the Black and White could do.  And this stands as a truth once and for all, and those who wish can always draw energy from it.
   The pity of it is partly that when several people care for the same cause and work on it together, unity is strength, and united they can do more than their separate energies can, each striving in a different direction.  People strengthen each other when they work together, and an entity is formed without personality having to be blotted out by the collaboration. This is why I wish Rappard was fully recovered. We don’t actually work together, but we have similar ideas about many questions. He’s getting better and we’re again dealing in woodcuts together. Yet I always have hopes that we’ll become even better friends than up to now, and perhaps later visit the miners together or something like that. But for the time being I believe that both he and I must do our best at thorough study of the figure; the more one has mastered that the more attainable such plans become. He says he’s had a fever, nothing more, and is still weak, but he’s tight-lipped about his illness.  We’ve had snow here again that’s now melting. The thaw is very beautiful. I imagine that this spring could be unusually delightful for you. Write soon about how your patient is getting on. Well, I’ll enjoy the spring too. Today, while the snow melts, one feels the spring in the distance, so to speak.  I think that we’ll have a real day when you come, sooner or later. Perhaps you’ll agree with me that in times of worry, such as you will certainly have now because of her illness, one can best feel the poetry of things. I long for the spring so that I can get a breath of fresh air instead of working at home, which has made me a little dull. I’m still very happy with my sou’wester. I’m curious to know whether you’ll find anything good in the heads of fishermen. The last one I did this week was of a chap with a white fringe of beard.  I know of one drawing by Boyd Houghton which he calls ‘my models’ and which shows a corridor where several invalids — one on crutches, one blind, one a street urchin &c. — come to visit a painter on Christmas Day. There’s something nice about dealing with models — one learns a lot from them — this winter I’ve had people who will always stay in my memory. I like Edouard Frère’s remark that he had hung on to his models so that ‘those who used to pose as babies now pose as mothers’. Well, adieu, Theo, write soon. Sincere best wishes. Believe me, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent 3 February My dear Theo, I dearly long for your letter again, and since it’s 3 Feb. already (and it’s past the postman’s time today) I’m writing as a precaution. If it’s because you wrote a few days later it will be all right, but owing to what happened with the letter this winter I’m letting you know in case you wrote before the first. Then it might be as well if you made enquiries.  I’ve noticed that the postmen sometimes give letters for Schenkweg to people living there instead of delivering them themselves. For the postmen it’s sometimes a long way off their route, and I know this because the postman asked me to deliver something for him the other day, which of course I did — though I thought about the lost letter. Oh well.  We’ve had storms here of late, especially last night. There’ll be rough seas.  How is your patient getting along? In what you write I see things that touch me deeply (such as that she paid the debt of the man who had deceived her), that are really noble. That not finding that member of parliament ‘at home’ reminded me of the name that Punch gives to the secretary of home affairs (the Home Secretary is his title). In Punch this personage is never called anything but the Seldom at Home Secretary. What a lot of these Seldom-at-home people there are! And Dickens calls all of them together the circumlocution office. a  A great many people stand sighing before the door of these how-not-to-do-it institutions, and their sighs may be no less deep than those on the old Bridge of Sighs.
   I’ve been feeling very weak of late — I fear that I’ve rather overworked myself — and those ‘dregs’ of working, those afterpains of exertion, how horrible they are. Then life has the colour of dirty water, it’s like a rubbish dump. At those times one would like to have a friend near one. Sometimes that clears up the dim mist.  On such days I sometimes worry terribly about the future and am melancholy about my work, and feel powerless. But it’s dangerous to speak too much of this or to keep thinking about it, so enough.  I’ve nevertheless been working on a watercolour sketch, again of diggers, or rather road-menders, here in Schenkweg, but it’s no good.  I’ve also drawn a few figures in conté5 that are better, I believe.  Not just with conté, but making the whole thing wet and letting the shadows flow, the lights heightened again. It may also be that I’ve caught a cold — but before I can really do anything I must get over this lack of energy.  I’m reading Uit mijne gevangenistijd by Fritz Reuter, which is most amusing. The Germans have their own distinctive humour that’s different from that of the English. Herkomer once did a peasant carnival, rather like Peasant Bruegel, in which that’s also strong. 
   Speaking of Herkomer, I recently read a sort of biography of him, though pretty incomplete.  But this struck me, among other things. He lived and painted for a time in an empty house, or perhaps one that wasn’t even finished, for he hadn’t got the rent. Then he was taken on by The Graphic and was relatively free of cares. But even when he was employed there, he still enjoyed little respect. To the point even that the first idea for Last muster at Chelsea Hospital, which is a drawing that differs relatively little from the final composition but has a certain rough look, was almost rejected. No one in The Graphic administration approved of it, except for the manager at the time. (I’d be most surprised if he’s still in the management.) He made sure that the sketch was placed and asked Herkomer if he would do it again in greater detail for him. So that’s the origin of a painting that has since astounded the best in Paris and London.  NOW nearly everyone would find the first sketch very beautiful.  It also said that he’s not someone who works easily; on the contrary, from the beginning and ever since he has struggled with a kind of awkwardness, and can’t do a painting without racking his brains a very great deal. 
   That even now he’s still described by many as disagreeable is something I find nearly incomprehensible.  It’s almost impossible to imagine anything deeper than his work.  When you come I’ll show you the woodcut of the old women’s home, less well known but no less fine than the old men. A little like The sewing school at Katwijk by Israëls.  Well, write soon if you haven’t already done so. I’m longing for news of your patient. Best wishes for that and for everything. Also, my congratulations on Pa’s birthday. I sent Pa a drawing that I did after he made some comments about the first old man in the lithograph. Not because I entirely agreed with Pa, but I thought, now that I know how you would like it to be, I’ll try and make it for you. Yet I fear I haven’t succeeded. One doesn’t always manage to please people when one does one’s best. Pa didn’t write that he didn’t like it, but that was what came across anyway. It may indeed be that it’s no good. Well, when you come home they’ll show it to you. Adieu — but don’t say anything to them about it. Ever yours, Vincent 5 February My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and for the money. There’s much that comes to mind when I read or re-read your letters about your patient. And I’d like to ask you much more and write to you — but because I only know the person through your letters, it’s all too vague and too indefinable, and occasionally I’ve torn up a letter about it. But believe this, it is constantly in my thoughts in spite of myself, and that such a meeting, apart from the melancholy thought of her suffering, is something you’re grateful for and regard as a rare piece of good fortune — that I can readily understand and I agree completely. That je ne sais quoi, as with the heath, or that recalls her native country, the old coast of Brittany, is something that will become stronger rather than weaker with time, I believe, when you’ve been with her longer.  I thought1 your expression: ‘Will she later be like the dog with the shepherd, or something better?’ quite typical — don’t you think it likely that it will vary considerably from time to time? In one and the same love there are so many different states or metamorphoses — precisely because of the loyalty to one and the same love — that it’s constantly changing.
   It’s still a difficult phase, that operation — if I were you I shouldn’t talk to her too much about looking for a job later — given that, especially in relation to her foot, the future is so uncertain — better leave it uncertain. For I would fear that, precisely in a crisis of pain, say, that she might very inopportunely get an idée fixe such as ‘I must do this or that’ — this does happen with women who are ill — which might make her somewhat obstinate, against her own heart, and which would grieve you, because it was out of delicacy that you wanted to leave her future FREE and independent through the idea of a job, and she might take it that you were more indifferent to her than is the case. This may be putting it too vaguely, but women by no means always understand delicacy, any more than humour, and while one certainly ought to act with delicacy, this sometimes leads to misunderstandings (although in my view one can’t be held responsible for that) which make life more difficult. Anyway. I don’t know whether Heyerdahl, for instance, would find anything picturesque about the woman I am with — in her everyday actions. But Daumier certainly would. I thought of Heyerdahl’s words — I don’t like a figure to be too degenerate — when I was drawing not the woman but the old man with a bandage over his eye, and I found they were not true. There are ruins, absolute ruins, of physiognomies, which nonetheless have something that I see fully expressed in, for example, the Hille Bobbe by Frans Hals3 or some heads by Rembrandt. Now, as for Heyerdahl, I don’t really doubt that the intention behind what he said was good, but if one didn’t bear that in mind I don’t think it would be valid.
   In the last letter I wrote to you I asked in passing about the work of Lhermitte. In reviews of the Black and White he almost always comes out on top as ‘the Millet and Jules Breton in Black and White’, and there was, for instance, a description of a drawing of old women on the cliffs, and it said of his way of working that no one was bolder, more audacious, more vigorous than he, to such an extent that it was astounding and was unlike any other drawings, and was approached more broadly than the broadest. He was compared with Legros too, but only with the most outstanding, most excellent drawings or etchings by Legros, which are also very vigorous and broad, for example the pew. Old chap, I’m still a little weak, and I’ve had a pretty clear warning that I must be careful — my eyes sometimes seemed tired to me, but I didn’t want to imagine things. But last night, for example, there was a great discharge of the fluid one always has in the eyes and my eyelashes kept sticking together, and looking is an effort and is cloudy, so to speak.  Now, since about the middle of December I’ve been slogging away without stopping, mainly on those heads. This last week I’ve deliberately gone out of doors a good deal to refresh myself, and taken several baths and washed my head often with cold water &c. &c. But at a time like this one feels so ill — I have a big pile of studies, but they give me no pleasure and I think them all bad. 
   Rappard wrote to me again this week, will only get back to normal slowly, he wrote, was weak but beginning to go for a walk outside now and then. Otherwise wrote lucidly and clearly about various things to do with work.  Now and then everything outside looks spring-like, and it won’t be long before the lark sings in the meadow again.  Will you still come in the spring??? Now I fear not. I’d like to discuss the studies from this winter — with you, and with Rappard too, sometime — he’ll come one day when he’s better.  I’ll rest for about a week or so sometime, and continue to go for walks out of doors — to get new ideas. I wanted to get something from my studies for watercolours, for instance, but that’s not working at all well at the moment.  In my eyes and my face I now look as if I’ve been having a high old time — which of course is not the case — on the contrary, but who knows if some time from now I don’t even notice that someone I meet has remarked that I’m evidently going downhill? These things are sometimes so silly that I can’t help laughing at them.  When the sun sets in the evenings there are effects of dark clouds with silver edges that are superb if one is walking on Bezuidenhout or Boschkant, for example. You’ll remember that. It’s also beautiful from the window of the studio or in the meadow — one feels spring in the distance, and now and again the air is already balmy.  Adieu, old chap, thanks again for your letter, good luck with your patient — I hope that I’ll soon find a drawing or a study again with something in it. It’s so disagreeable when one must ‘take a rest’. One cannot rest precisely because one must. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. 8 Feb. My dear Theo, My sincere congratulations to you too on Pa’s birthday, and thank you for your letter, which I received just now and am delighted by. I congratulate you especially on the operation being behind you. Things such as you describe make one shudder. May it now be overcome — and at least the crisis over. Poor woman!  If women sometimes don’t have the same energy and resilience in their thinking as men who have striven to think things through and analyze them — are they to be blamed for that? I believe not, because in general they must devote so much more strength than we to suffering pain. They suffer more and are more sensitive. And even if they sometimes don’t understand what one is thinking, they’re sometimes quite capable of understanding whether one is good for them. Not in every respect perhaps, but ‘the spirit is willing’2 and there’s a sort of goodness in women at times that is entirely peculiar to them. It must be a weight off your mind that the operation has been done.  What a riddle life is, and love is a riddle within a riddle. Staying the same is the only thing that it certainly doesn’t do in a literal sense, but on the other hand the changes are a kind of ebb and flow and make no difference to the sea itself.  I’ve rested my eyes a little since I last wrote to you and felt better for it, although they still sting.  Do you know what I couldn’t help thinking? — that in the first part of life as a painter one sometimes unintentionally makes things difficult for oneself — through a feeling of not yet having mastered the business — through the uncertainty one feels about whether one will master it — through the fierce desire to make progress — through not yet trusting oneself — one cannot put aside a certain feeling of being harried, and one harries oneself despite not wanting to be harried when one works. There’s nothing to be done about it, and this is a time that one also can’t do without, and that should not and cannot be otherwise, in my view.  In the studies, too, one sees for oneself the agitation and a certain precision that’s diametrically opposed to the calm breadth one seeks — and yet one feels bad if one works specifically for that breadth and devotes oneself to that.  As a result there’s sometimes a bottling up of nervous restlessness and stress, and one feels an oppressiveness as on some summer days before a storm. I’ve just had that again, and when I feel like that I change to different work, precisely in order to start from scratch. 
   The difficulties one faces in the first phase give the studies a painful quality at times.  I don’t regard this as something that discourages me, though, because I’ve noticed it in others as much as in myself, and in them it has increasingly gone away of its own accord.  And work remains difficult at times throughout one’s life, I believe, but not always with so few results as in the beginning.  What you write about Lhermitte is entirely in accord with what it said in a review of an exhibition of Black and White.  That also talks about a rude assault that is almost impossible to compare with anything else except Rembrandt.  I’d like to know how someone like that sees Judas — you write about a drawing of Judas before the scribes by him. I believe Victor Hugo could describe that in detail so that one saw it. But it would be even more difficult to paint the expressions.  I’ve found a Daumier print, Those who have seen a tragedy and those who have seen a vaudeville. I begin to long for Daumier more and more as time passes. There’s something pithy and ‘considered’ in him. He’s amusing and yet full of emotion and passion. Sometimes, it seems to me I find a passion that might be likened to white-hot iron, in the drunkards, for instance, and probably in the Barricade7 too (which I don’t know). That’s also in some heads by Frans Hals, for example. It’s so subdued that it seems cold, and when one takes a look at it — — — one is amazed that someone evidently working with so much emotion and becoming completely absorbed and lost in nature at the same time has that presence of mind to set it down with such a steady hand. I found something similar in studies and drawings by Degroux. Perhaps Lhermitte is another white-hot one. And Menzel too. There are sometimes passages in Balzac and Zola – in Père Goriot, for example – in which one finds a degree of passion in words that’s white-hot.
   I sometimes think about experimenting with a completely different way of working, namely daring and risking more. But I don’t know whether I ought not to study the figure more directly, definitely with a model.  I’m also looking for a way of shutting out the light in the studio or letting it in as desired. At present not enough comes from above, I believe, and there’s too much. I’ve sometimes closed it off with cardboard temporarily, but I’ll see if I can get shutters from the landlord.  What was in the letter I told you I had torn up9 was in the spirit of what you say. But as one realizes more and more that one isn’t perfect and has shortcomings, and that others do too, and thus there are continual difficulties that are the opposite of illusions, so I believe that those who don’t lose heart and don’t become apathetic as a result mature through it, and one must endure in order to mature.  Sometimes I can’t understand all the same that I’m only 30 and feel so much older.  I feel older especially when I think that most of the people who know me regard me as a failure, and I believe that if a few things don’t change for the better this really could be the case, and when I think, it could turn out like that, then I feel that with such reality that I’m totally oppressed by it and I lose all enjoyment, as if it were really so. 
   When I’m in a more normal and calm mood, I’m sometimes glad that 30 years are past and haven’t gone by without my learning something in them for the future, and I feel strength and zest for the next 30 — if I last that long. And in my imagination I see years of serious work, and happier ones than the first 30.  How it will turn out in reality doesn’t depend on me alone — the world and circumstances must also cooperate.  What concerns me, and what I’m responsible for, is that I make the most of the circumstances I’m in, and do my best to make progress.  As a working man, at the age of 30 one is at the beginning of a period in which one feels steadiness in oneself. As such, one feels young and full of zest.  Yet at the same time a period of life is over, which makes one sad that this or that will never come back. And it isn’t weak10 sentimentality to feel a certain sorrow now and then. Anyway, much only begins when one is 30, and it’s certain that not everything is over by then. But one doesn’t expect from life what one already knows from experience that it cannot give. Rather, one begins to see much more clearly that life is only a time of fertilization and that the harvest is not here.  This is why one sometimes thinks, what do I care about the world’s judgement?, and if that judgement is too much of a burden, one can shrug it off.  Perhaps now I ought to tear up this letter as well. 
   I can understand that you’re very much preoccupied with the woman’s condition, and that’s one of the things needed to save her and to ensure that she makes a good recovery. For one must throw oneself into it, and the saying applies, If you want it well done you must do it yourself, you mustn’t leave it to others. That is to say, one must keep hold of the general care and overseeing of the whole.  We’ve had a couple of true spring days, including last Monday, which I enjoyed. The change of the seasons is something the people feel very much. For example, in a neighbourhood like the Geest district and in the almshouses or so-called ‘gift houses’13 winter is always an anxious14 and difficult and frightening time, and spring a deliverance. If one looks closely, one sees that there’s a kind of gospel on the first day of spring. And on such a day it’s heart-rending to see so many grey, withered faces expressly coming out of doors, not to do anything in particular but as if to convince themselves that spring has come. So, for example, sometimes all kinds of people in whom one wouldn’t expect it crowd round a spot on the market where a trader is selling crocuses, snowdrops, goatsbeard and other bulbs. Sometimes a parchment ministry official, a sort of Josserand15 evidently, in a threadbare black coat with a felt collar — I find him beside the snowdrops beautiful. 
   I believe that the poor and the painters have the sentiment of the weather and the changing seasons in common. Of course everyone feels that, but for the better-off they’re hardly events at all, and don’t generally make much difference to their state of mind.  I like this remark by a polder worker: ‘In the winter I suffer as much cold as the winter corn’.  Now, your patient will certainly welcome the spring too. May she do well. What a difficult operation that is, at least I was shocked when I read the description. Rappard is getting better — did I write to you that he’d had a nervous fever of the brain? It will be some time before he can work as before, but he has started going for walks now and then.  I’ll follow your advice to bathe my eyes with tea if it doesn’t go away. It’s lessening, so for the present I’ll let things take their natural course. Because I was never troubled by it in the past, except this winter along with toothache, and so I believe it to be something accidental caused by my unusual exertions. And now I can bear the tired eyes when drawing better than in the beginning. Write again soon if you can, and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent I don’t know if you know the ‘gift houses’ on Brouwersgracht opposite the hospital. I’d like to draw there when the weather permits. I’ve already made a few scratches there this week. They’re some rows of houses with small gardens which belong to the poor board, I believe. Dear brother, It’s Sunday again and I’m writing again. Sometimes it seems to me that I haven’t told you warmly and sincerely enough how deeply touched I’ve been by what you’ve told me of late.  As to whether a sincerely felt love could turn into a lost illusion, I don’t doubt that it sometimes happens — it would surprise me very much if it happened in your case, and I don’t believe it will happen to me. Michelet says, singularly, that love is a spider’s web at first and grows to be as strong as a cable. Provided there is faithfulness, that is.  Lately I’ve walked a good deal in the Geest district and in the streets and alleys where I often walked with the woman last year in the beginning. It was wet weather — I find everything there beautiful then — and when I got home I said to the woman, it’s just like last year. I write this in relation to disenchantment — no, no, there’s a wilting and a budding again in love as in the whole of nature, but not a dying for ever. There’s ebb and flow, but the sea remains the sea. And in love, whether for a woman or for art, for instance, there are times of exhaustion and powerlessness, but not a lasting disenchantment.  I regard love — as I do friendship — not only as a feeling but chiefly as an action2 — and particularly when it involves working and is an effort, it has another side of fatigue and powerlessness.  Where people love sincerely and in good faith, they are blessed I believe, although that doesn’t dispel difficult times. I’m glad that my eyes are no worse, in fact already much better, but it isn’t completely over yet, and I must be careful. I must tell you, I wasn’t pleased. How I’d like to talk to you — for I’m not despondent about the work, not apathetic or powerless, but I am rather stuck and that may be because I need to have some friction with people one can discuss it with; and with whom could I discuss it here in the present circumstances? At the moment there isn’t a single person in whom I can confide — NOT that I think none is to be trusted, far from it, but unfortunately I have too little contact with such people. 
   I sometimes think that when I first came to The Hague to G&Cie, years ago now, two of the 3 years I spent there were fairly unpleasant, but the last was much happier and so, who knows, something similar may happen here.  I like the saying, When things are at the worst they are sure to mend, but I sometimes ask, Are we by now at ‘the worst’?, for the ‘mending’ wouldn’t be unwelcome. Anyway. Lately I read ‘Le peuple’ by Michelet, or rather I read it some time ago, this winter in fact, but I was strongly reminded of it for the first time just lately.  The book was written quickly and evidently in haste, and if it was all one read by M. I believe one wouldn’t find it very beautiful, or one would be less struck by it. Knowing the more carefully worked books like La femme, L’amour, La mer and L’histoire de la revolution, I found it to be like a rough sketch by a painter I like very much, and as such it had a special charm.  I, for one, find M.’s way of working enviable. I don’t doubt for a moment that there will be many writers who disapprove of M.’s technique, just as some painters believe they have the right to find fault with Israëls’s technique. M. feels strongly, and what he feels he slaps on without troubling himself in the least about how he does it, and without thinking in the least about ‘technique’ or generally accepted forms, except in so far as he casts it into one form or another such that it’s comprehensible to those who wish to comprehend. In my view, though, Le peuple is less a first thought or impression than an unfinished but yet deliberate conception well thought-out in advance. Some fragments were evidently done in haste from nature and added to other parts that are more worked and studied. 
   Judging by his fur coat, De Bock appears to be in especially flourishing circumstances. I hadn’t seen him in months but ran into him a few days ago, in a magnificent fur coat &c., as mentioned. But he didn’t look flourishing, I thought. Have you yourself sometimes felt a sympathy towards a person who you saw was unhappy but who nonetheless appeared to be and was regarded as thriving?, and then felt in yourself, if I tried to make friends with him, he would think I was making a fool of him and it would be almost impossible to win his trust, let alone his attachment — and even if I got that far, he would say ‘The fact is that I’m in this situation’ &c. and we’d have no effect on each other. This is how I think of De Bock, and although I do feel sympathetic towards him and find much of what he does beautiful, I don’t believe that he and I would be much help to each other; we see opposite things, mainly in life but in art too.  I sometimes find it difficult to give up a friendship, but if I were to go to a studio and had to think to myself: talk about trivia, don’t bring up anything more important, and don’t say what your real feeling is about this or that in art, then I would be more melancholy than if I had stayed away. It’s hard for me to be content with conventional friendship, precisely because I seek and persevere in sincere friendship.  If there’s a desire to be friends on both sides, even if there are disagreements from time to time, one doesn’t get irritated with each other lightly, or if one does one makes it up. Where there is convention it’s almost inevitable that bitterness arises, precisely because one doesn’t feel free, and even if one doesn’t express one’s true feelings they’re still enough to leave a lasting, unpleasant impression on both sides and to remove any hope that one might be able to be of help to each other. Where there is convention there is suspicion, and from suspicion comes all kinds of intrigues. With rather more sincerity we’d make life easier for each other.  In the meantime one gets used to the existing situation, but it isn’t normal, and if it were possible to suddenly go back 30, 40 or 50 years I believe 
   one would feel more at home in that period than in this — that’s to say, you or I, for example, would feel at home there, I believe. In 50 years from now people won’t, I think, wish they were back in this period. For if it’s followed by a ‘periwig age’, people will be too drowsy to think about it at all, and if things improve — so much the better.  I don’t think it absurd to consider it possible that there may again be a kind of periwig age in the future, for after all what’s known as the periwig age in Dutch history had its origins in the abandonment of principles and the replacement of the original by the conventional.  If the Hollanders feel like it, they can be the syndics, but if the salt loses its savour it’s a periwig age. Not all of a sudden, but history proves that it can happen. I sometimes find it difficult to believe that a period of only 50 years, say, is enough to bring about a total change that turns everything around. Yet precisely through reflecting on history sometimes, one sees these relatively rapid and continuous changes. And for my part I’m led by this to the conclusion that every person still always puts some weight in the scale, though it may not be much, and that how one thinks and acts isn’t a matter of indifference. The battle is short and it’s worthwhile being sincere. If many are sincere and want what they want, then the whole period will be good, or at least energetic.  Yes, I think a great deal about what you’ve written to me recently. Don’t you agree that if one meets someone in such a state, that’s to say so weak and dependent, that very dependence is something through which one surrenders, as it were, and can’t imagine how one could abandon such a person? I believe there’s certainly a great difference between the woman you’ve met and the one I’ve been with for a whole year now, but they have misfortune in common, and the fact of being women, at any rate. Once people are so tied to each other, the bond is sacred and one thinks of the words ‘if I did not have you for ever, I would rather not have you’.  Taking a broad view, such an encounter is like an apparition. Have you read Madame Thérèse by Erckmann-Chatrian? There’s a description of a woman recovering that’s very striking and beautifully felt. It’s a modest book, but deep at the same time. 
   If you don’t know Mme Thérèse, read it sometime — I believe she’ll find it beautiful too, and be moved by it.  I sometimes regret that the woman I’m with can understand as little of books as of art. But (although she definitely can’t) isn’t the fact that I’m so attached to her nonetheless proof that there’s something sincere between us? Later, who knows, she may learn to grasp it, and it may become another bond between us, but now with the children, you understand, she’s got enough on her mind.  And through the children, especially, she’s in touch with reality and learning by herself. Books and reality and art are the same kind of thing for me. I’d find someone who was outside real life tiresome company, but someone who is fully inside it knows and feels by herself. If I didn’t seek art in the real, I’d probably find her stupid or something. Now I wish it were otherwise, but I’m still content with the way it is.  I hope to be able to work more regularly this week. I have the feeling that I have to work twice as hard to make up for starting late, and it’s the very sense that I’m behind others in my age that gives me no rest.  These days Montmartre no doubt has those curious effects painted by Michel, for example, i.e. that withered grass and sand against the grey sky. At any rate the colour in the meadows at present is often such that one thinks of Michel. The ground yellow, brown withered grass with a wet road with puddles, the tree-trunks black, the sky grey and the houses white, tonal from a distance and yet still having colour, in the red of the roofs, for example. These effects are telling enough, and Michel’s secret is such that it depends (as with Weissenbruch) on taking accurate measurements, seeing correct proportions of foreground to background, and correctly feeling the direction the lines take through perspective. 
   These are not things one finds by chance (Michel’s work is abundant enough, and from it I see clearly how he was on a height, so to speak, doing it with ease) but things one knows, and I believe that before the period when everything started going well Michel was sometimes amazed and disappointed that things weren’t working.  However simple everything may look — behind it there’s very extensive general science, as there is behind other simple-looking work, for example that of Daumier.  Well, I’ll end this. Write again soon if you haven’t already written. I’m longing to know whether any unusual effects of the operation have appeared in your patient.  I’m pleased that in the first letter I received from Rappard after his illness he again wrote with great enthusiasm, especially about woodcuts he had found, by Lançon among others. He’s now so keen that I no longer need to encourage him, and in the beginning he was as little interested as others. His collection is becoming very good, and I believe that I see the influence of the English in what he does and wants, although of course it’s far from his nature to imitate something. But the fact that, for example, he went to make studies at the institution for the blind before his illness12 is a very practical outcome of his love for draughtsmen like Herkomer and Frank Holl. Adieu, old chap, write soon, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, Although I wrote only yesterday, another word today after all, firstly to thank you for your letter and for the money. But also because the symptom of ‘rather depressed’ in your patient worries me. It may be my imagination, if so all the better, nothing would please me more, for if there’s no significant melancholy and it disappears of its own accord that is so much the better.  But if it persists and you see that something is wrong — and I for one think that’s the course it will take — be careful, for then the situation will be more serious and the only physician for that won’t be the doctor but you.  If the depression or anxiety persists, the cause, I fear, is that the patient — notwithstanding all the proofs of sincere loyalty, and precisely because of everything you’ve done for her — is tormented by the thought that sooner or later she’ll be parted from you.  We are brothers, are we not?, and friends — and we may say candidly what we think, and if I act indiscreetly by saying what I think, forgive me my indiscretion. But such cases can take — and very rapidly — a very sombre turn if one doesn’t act in good time. Especially as to morale, the patient is so weak and stressful and exhausted — though outwardly calm — that she’s now going through a crisis of the mind, much more serious in my view than any effect on the body. 
   So if that small cloud of melancholy persists, if a je ne sais quoi stands in the way of the rest that’s absolutely necessary for recovery, if it turns out that she’s thinking of something that she doesn’t say aloud — then in my view there’s no doubt, precisely because of her weak and stressful condition, that she’s in mortal fear, I repeat mortal fear, over the question of whether you love her or not.  Has deep inside her a sea of love that seethes and is agitated and doesn’t express that precisely because she doubts whether you love her unless you tell her so, freely and frankly.  This inner turmoil can be so strong (even though the cloud of outward melancholy is terribly small and scarcely apparent to you, and even less so to strangers) — this turmoil can be so strong that recovery isn’t possible, and severe consequences are to be expected if she isn’t reassured on that point at all costs. Now I know that, out of discretion, one doesn’t want to speak now, but only after the recovery is complete and she’s freely and completely herself.  Or doesn’t want to repeat oneself and thinks, I’ve done enough for her to understand that I’m her friend and that she can count on everything that’s in me to help her.  Yet, I repeat, if the depression persists — and more than anything else that makes rest simply impossible, and without rest there can be no improvement — then speak to her again as your heart dictates. 
   Dear brother, I speak not wildly but from my own soul and my own experience. I can tell you this about the case I was involved in. When the woman had given birth and had survived the extremely difficult delivery, she was terribly weak but still safe at first, and the child alive and peaceful. 12 hours after the birth I was with her and found her utterly exhausted. When she saw me she sat up and became as cheerful and lively as if nothing had happened, and her pleasure in life and thankfulness radiated from her eyes. And she wanted to get better and promised me that.  (How it’s sometimes necessary to have such a thing promised and how it’s necessary to want to get better — you’ve already realized that yourself, for I see it in a previous letter. You saw that correctly.)  But — a few days later I had a letter from her that I didn’t rightly understand and that disappointed me. It said something along the lines of ‘that now I would no doubt be with another woman’ &c. In short, very strange and even absurd since, not yet fully recovered, I’d only just come out of hospital myself. I understood enough, though, to realize that she was delirious and upset. I went back to see her immediately, that is as soon as I could; I wasn’t allowed to visit during the week, so the next Sunday, a week later to be precise. I found her looking withered — literally like a tree with fresh greenery that a dry, cold wind has swept over, making the buds shrivel.  And in reaction the child ill as well and looking wizened. In the child’s case it was jaundice, according to the doctor, but the little eyes were also affected by something else and as if blind, and the woman, who did not have jaundice, looked withered, yellow, grey, I don’t know what else. In short, evidently in that week, everything had, I can’t put it any other way, withered and wilted. So much so that I was shocked.  What to do? How did it happen and what to say? She herself told me she could not rest and was evidently thoroughly melancholic — without the slightest reason, without anything having happened since the first Sunday. 
   Well, I thought, something must be done here, and although I didn’t know for sure what was going on I gave it a try.  I pretended to be angry and said, well, is this how you keep your promise!, and I repeated the promise that she’d get better, and I showed I was very displeased that the child was ill and said that it was her fault, and I asked what that letter meant and, in a word, since I understood that this was an abnormal situation, I spoke abnormally, that is fairly sharply, although I felt nothing other than deep compassion. The result was a sort of awakening like that of a sleep-walker, and before I left, of course not without adjusting my tone, I had her repeat the promise to get better, and as quickly as possible.  Dear brother, from that moment on she recovered rapidly, and soon afterwards I collected her and the child from the hospital. The child continued ailing for a long time — perhaps because in the first days the mother thought more about me than about the child — but now of course it’s as healthy as a young rabbit and looks as clearly as a young rabbit from eyes that were originally shut tight. When I came to collect her and was waiting for her in a small waiting room in the hospital, as the woman came in with the child on her arm, all at once there again came over her that heart-rending quality that Ary Scheffer paints or Correggio. Again, if I’m mistaken in thinking that there’s a kind of delirium or inner conflict (unfounded naturally) in your patient too, so much the better. But should symptoms of melancholia persist, have her promise again that she’ll get better, and show her plainly that you want her to get better and that you simply can’t do without her. You see, we sometimes feel a certain delicacy about saying it like that because it appears selfish, but don’t feel embarrassed about it now, because it’s her salvation, and not selfish in such a case. For when two people are so attuned to each other that they can no longer be at ease and calm alone, then there’s no question of egoism any more, for the two no longer need to become one since they are that already. That must express itself, however, and with a sick person this need for an outpouring of the heart can be such an absolute need that recovery depends upon it. 
   And even now that I’m continuing to talk about it (forgive me for going on, for I can’t help but say fully what I think in this matter), for days I’ve pictured your patient in my imagination (perhaps mistakenly, though — I don’t know for sure of course, and these are the kinds of thing one can’t help linking together) as being in the same sort of condition as my woman in the days after her confinement was over.  I’ve been imagining that since receiving your letter in which you describe the operation, and it has left me no peace, so to speak. And when I now read ‘rather depressed’ I couldn’t help writing about it. Almost from the beginning even, each time I tried to imagine your patient’s state of mind — when I think how the series of calamities that have struck her must have bewildered her — I believe her condition to be beyond the reach of any remedy except that of love in the fullest sense of the word.  Without you regard her as lost, I can think of no rescue, no renewal of the future for her, without you. And although I find some expressions in your letters from which I see, or at least believe I see, that as regards the future you’re in doubt as to the question of whether or not she will love you now and for ever — for my part I have only a single thought on that point, namely this, she loves you, and as to you I have only one question: have you already told her that you love her now and for ever, or have you said nothing about that, either out of discretion or because you were afraid to hurt her? 
   Of course I speak of these intimate matters (which incidentally I regard as so intimate that I would not speak of them without a special reason) only because I see this resemblance between your patient and mine then: 1) both have undergone a difficult operation and weren’t entirely calm throughout that operation, despite the chloroform; 2) shortly before the operation both had huge shocks to the mind through anxiety and tension and unrest, and their morale suffered almost more than a nervous system can bear; 3) for both, rest for the soul and body is absolutely necessary for recovery and recuperation. It seems to me that these resemblances are worth noting. And now you speak of a symptom of melancholy. And I thought it might be of use to you to hear how that became very serious in my patient, and very threatening and dangerous within a few days even, and how — when her mind was put at rest, she was reassured precisely through the certainty of a new love, and thus felt hope and appetite for the future — she soon recovered in body, at any rate from the operation.  Before that time I, for my part, had already assured her with all the strength in me that I wouldn’t abandon her, less through words, though, than through one or two things that I did for her as best I could, but through words as well. Despite that, doubt and unease suddenly arose in her, but they disappeared when I again did my best to calm her down.  Do you still remember how I took the view in a previous letter that there were objections to your having mentioned a job? — I had already glimpsed something dimly in my mind — now you write about the beginnings of melancholy — well, I was afraid of that. I hope quite wrongly, but if the melancholy persists and the unrest and the je ne sais quoi that blocks recovery, then in my view it’s a new assurance of your love and faithfulness that will reassure her and prepare her for recovery. Yes, in my view her life may depend on it. Adieu, old chap. I write to you to the best of my knowledge and out of unfeigned sympathy and serious interest — indeed you know that, and that it’s my deepest desire that everything may go well. Thanks again for your letter and the enclosure. My letter about ‘rather depressed’ has unintentionally become so long that there’s no room to write about anything else. Believe me, with a handshake and best wishes, Ever yours, Vincent Up to today my eyes were closed by fluid each night or morning when I awoke, but last night nothing in either for the first time. There’s nothing to be seen other than that the white was a little cloudy and red, and what they call blue bags under the eyes, and that’s nearly gone too.  My dear Theo, Sincerest thanks for your letter, and the enclosure was most welcome; it really does help me. I begin by telling you that it’s a great relief to me that the past of the woman you write about is entirely different from what I first instinctively thought. Namely that she has known not only misery and straitened circumstances, but also other things, so I believe that she’ll appreciate you fully, also as regards civilization and broader views, much more so than a woman who has been hurt by misery from an early age and knows no better than to think that normal. From what you say about reading, for example, I can see that she has a feeling that many other women certainly do not have. Social standing and her vicissitudes help to shape her character and, it seems to me, make her suitable for you. Yes, if she gets better, you’ll be doubly happy. And I wish from my heart that she becomes your wife, for a woman makes life so completely different. And a woman like her — what is she without a man who values and understands her? A distressing sight — yes, as you said, like a spirit or a ghost.  Look, if you were gone I fear that is what she’d relapse into (even if her circumstances and even her health were otherwise).  And with you, I believe, an unending inner happiness for both her and you would lie within reach, stemming from the very awareness of no longer being alone.  For us men, too, being alone is sometimes terribly hard. 
   Yet: the poetry of Israëls without anyone who understands it — see, that is something so very awful that it’s almost beyond one’s comprehension, and one can’t grasp the concept. That wandering and drifting alone — — What Michelet says is profound, Why is there a woman alone on earth? You once said, or rather wrote, seriousness is better than the cleverest raillery. Now isn’t it just the same here? Shouldn’t one take such a figure seriously?  I mean, the life of we men is so dependent on our relations with women, and of course the same is true the other way around, that it seems to me one shouldn’t make fun of women or think lightly of them. If one reads carefully, Balzac’s petty vexations of married life are very, very serious and good, honestly meant, not to divide but to unite, but not everyone sees that in it. I think you’ll also find her in the work of Ary Scheffer.  When I read your letter it immediately struck me that you’re dealing with a person here who will be able, for example, to transport herself to the past with you, who will learn to see what you see in art, and that’s worth a great deal. I congratulate you, old chap, that judging by your description she’s the sort of woman to whom the words of Michelet apply: ‘A lady is a lady’. As for reading, the work of Michelet seems to me to be something that would give her spirit and tone.  And Victor Hugo equally.  And the reading MICHELET himself regards as desirable for a woman is L’imitation de Jésus Christ by Thomas a Kempis6 — the original version, of course, not the botched one that the clergy distorted. 
   But you probably know more about French literature than I do. The book by Thomas a Kempis is as beautiful as, for example, Ary Scheffer’s Consolator;7 it’s something one can’t compare to anything else. But I’ve seen editions of it that were wholly and deliberately distorted and altered by having a horrible sort of explanation added to each chapter. I still have one myself that I was once tricked into buying. And do you know what I think would be excellent, especially when a patient must breathe in fresh air from a book? It’s La nature chez elle by BODMER with the text by Théophile Gautier. The old series, available from L’Illustration or Monde Illustré. But recently I saw a Nat. chez elle that was far more meagre and less fresh than the first series, and in which the text wasn’t by T. G., as I remember. Probably done by Bodmer later when he had lost some of his early gusto.  Old chap, I’ve had so much pleasure drawing fishermen’s heads with that sou’wester, which had fish scales still stuck to it when I got it.  The feeling that you’ll have had on your walk to the hospital or clinic the day you visited her after she’d undergone the operation — isn’t that one of those things one can hardly speak of, so strong are the emotions? — at any rate when you wrote to me about the operation I thought back to last summer when I visited the woman the day she gave birth.
   You wrote lately about a certain Laurens who generally made large drawings or paintings. Now I didn’t know who he was (unless he was the one who did oriental landscapes &c.), but today I saw an etching by Courtry after a painting by Jean Paul Laurens, a scene from the Revolutionary age, and found it very beautiful, especially some types and heads. But I think it quite likely that his paintings don’t look as beautiful as the etching. Is the work of Jules Goupil still beautiful? One is prompted to ask this when one sees men like Emile Wauters and Hoeterickx, for instance, exchanging their powerful snatches from reality for things that are, yes, refined and finely felt too, yet don’t match the boldness of their early work, and betray a certain timidity almost. And when things go like that, it’s a pity.  To stay bold — like Israëls, say — how few there are who bring it off. Lately I saw a new edition of the illustrated books by R. Caldecott and bought two of them, illustrations to Washington Irving’s Sketchbook, the 2 together now costing only 1 shilling. It’s a description of Christmas in a village at the beginning of this century. Those small drawings are as pithy as those by Jacque, say, or Menzel.  When you come, you must see the woodcuts again. There are fellows, like Caldecott now, for instance, who are highly individual and extraordinarily interesting. How I wish we could be together more in the evenings or on Sundays. So that we could look through ‘those things’ that many pass by.  I’m reading Eliot, Middlemarch. Eliot analyzes like Balzac or Zola, but English situations and with an English feeling. Adieu, old chap, best wishes with everything, and many thanks again. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I wanted to write to you on Sunday but I waited because I was busy with something that hadn’t yet been decided. A week or so ago I was reading Fritz Reuter’s ‘Uit mijn gevangenistijd’, in which he describes very amusingly how Fritz R. and others serving fortress sentences made life as agreeable as possible and secured various privileges from their ‘field officer’. That book gave me the idea of tackling my landlord2 with a view to certain improvements that would make my work easier.  And I’ve been back and forth to Voorburg, where he lives, several times to get him to do one thing and another. There were some old wooden blinds and planks lying there that I wanted to use, but it wasn’t easy to get them. Still, I have them now. As you know, there are 3 windows in the studio. They give much too much light, even if I cover them, and I’ve long been thinking about how to remedy this. 
   But he didn’t want to do anything unless I paid him.  But now, as the result of tackling him again, I have 6 blinds and about 6 long planks.   Those blinds are now being sawn to make shutters that can be manoeuvred so that more or less light is shut out or let in as required, from above or below. From this scratch I think you’ll see that it works very nicely.  And the planks are for a big cupboard in the alcove, for storing drawings, prints, books, and as a hatstand for various smocks, jackets, old coats, shawls and hats, not forgetting the sou’wester, which I need for the models.  I’ve paid the landlord regularly and have now told him straight out that I wouldn’t contradict him if he thought the rent for the house was low, but I asked him to consider that for me the rent was still a heavy burden. And that I could not work readily 
   or make progress until I had better light.  That if he couldn’t change it I, for my part, really would be forced to find another studio. That if I could afford it I would put up with paying for it, but now I wasn’t in a position to pay more than I was already. So my paying more was out of the question, and whether I stayed depended on whether or not he would have this done. If my leaving was a matter of indifference to him, we’d part as good friends and say no more. Well, then he said, no, he did want to do something, and so we finally agreed that I need only pay a few guilders’ worth of labour.  He’s been to the studio himself repeatedly and is certainly not a swindler, though he has a pretty sharp tongue (a bit like a Yankee). And it seems that the studio was better than he’d expected (he hadn’t seen it since July last year); at any rate I got it approved while in the studio, and more easily even than I expected.  If only one could always deal with people in the studio! But outside it I, for one, can’t get them to do much and can’t get on well with them. 
   Have been working on some figures, rather large, busts or to the knees, which will be a sort of decoration for the corridor and stairs, together with a few others, though they’re really no more than ordinary studies. Anyway, you see from one thing and another that I’ve once again thrown myself headlong into it, so that I’ll get new ideas in my head through being busy.  At Voorburg, for example, when I went with him to sort out that wood, I saw beautiful scenes of labourers in a shed and the excavation of a cellar and the laying of the foundations of a house. I thought of what you once wrote to me about the labourers in Montmartre5 when you were there, when one of them injured himself in a stone quarry. As you know, I already had something in front of the windows, namely canvas stretched on laths. They’re no longer needed now, but will be highly desirable as backgrounds, with darker or lighter material stretched over them, when one wants to draw heads, for example. You see now that I’ll be able to cover over one or two windows completely and thus obtain one general light that will make the effects much stronger. Otherwise they’d be neutralized by reflections or different lights.  The job would have been entirely out of the question if I’d had to pay for it myself, since it was expensive, and I’m very pleased with it.  I felt that better light was desirable, especially when doing drawings like those I was working on of late, such as those heads I sent you in which I used a stronger black.
   I hope everything will work properly but you can see for yourself from this scratch that it’s so simple that it’s bound to work, it seems to me. Yet how miserable today’s houses often are compared with what they could be if people made an effort to furnish them pleasantly.  Compare a modern window with one from Rembrandt’s time. In those days everyone seems to have had a sort of need for a curious, dimmed light that no longer seems to exist, at least there’s a tendency to make it cold, harsh and loveless. A good start was made with workers’ dwellings, but I see no sign of advances being made since those of 20 or 30 years ago. On the contrary, the pleasing aspect is increasingly lost, and it turns into something cold and systematic and methodical that becomes ever more empty with time. If I could have, I would have had the windows altered like this:   which wouldn’t have been that much more if we hadn’t been dealing with blinds that already existed. The difference is only that there’s a frame around each square of light, and the blinds are thus slightly smaller.  But the latter is an agreeable and easily achieved, pleasing window. But one can’t have everything. And it ought really to have a broad window-sill — where one could sit — which is entirely lacking in this house. 
   I’m longing for your letter and news of your patient. May she have remained calm and may the recovery be normal and successful. But it doesn’t always go smoothly and rapidly, and something or other almost always comes up, and at all events one must be very much on the alert. Just last week I read Notre-Dame by Hugo, which I had read before over 10 years ago. Do you know who I recognized in it, or at least was so convinced I recognized that I don’t doubt that Victor Hugo intended some such thing? I recognized Thijs Maris in Quasimodo.  Most people who read N. Dame probably have an impression of Quasimodo as a sort of clown. But you wouldn’t think Quasimodo ridiculous any more than I would, and like me you would feel that what Hugo says is true. For those who know that Quasimodo existed, now Notre-Dame is empty. For not only was he its inhabitant, but he was its soul. If one takes Notre-Dame as a symbol of the movement in art that found expression in, for instance, Leys and Degroux (sometimes) and Lagye and De Vriendt, Henri Pille, the following can be applied to Thijs Maris: now there’s an emptiness for those who know that he existed, for he was its soul, and the soul of that art, it was he. Anyway, Thijs Maris still exists but not in his full prime and vigour — not unhurt and disenchanted to the extent that there can be disenchantment with him. One of the enormities committed by the painters here is, I believe, that even now they still laugh at Thijs Maris. I think there’s something as dismal as suicide in that. Why suicide? Because Thijs Maris is such an embodiment of something high and noble that in my view a painter can’t mock that without lowering himself.  Those who don’t understand Maris, so much the worse for them, those who do understand him grieve for him, and grieve that such a person has snapped. Noble blade, ignoble scabbard — In my soul I am fair. This is applicable to Thijs M. and to Quasimodo. Well — write soon if you haven’t written already, and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just a word to report the safe arrival of your letter and to thank you for it.  And to tell you it pleases me greatly that you were able to send good news about your patient. So much the better. There are many loves in one love — and things are very different again when the woman regains her health — and that’s wonderful too. Continuing and persevering is the main thing; if you want variety you should remain faithful. And if you want to see many women you should confine yourself to one and the same. Spring is coming along well here.  At the moment I’m in a complete mess. Enclosed a scratch1 dashed off when the blinds were put in place. On a scrap of paper. Why send it to you like this, insignificant as it is in its natural state? Because I believe that you’ll see one thing clearly from it, that now I can get a light effect in my studio that’s totally different from the overly strong light of the 3 big windows.  Window 1 now (in the scratch) has its lower part closed off, and the rest too in part. Now looks like the door of a room in an almshouse, say.  Window 2 has its top part closed off and looks like a window where the figures sit. The background on the left is dark because window 3 is completely closed.  Imagine the difference from the effect of harsh light that the three windows would give at present without blinds and you’ll well understand how one can work infinitely better now. Apart from the light coming in, there was an enormous reflection in the past that neutralized all effects. 
   I was often desperate when, for example, I saw a little old lady pottering about in a small room and there was a character and something mysterious in the figure that vanished completely when I had that same old lady in the studio.  Equally, the orphan man, say, was much finer in a dark passage than in my studio. And this was most regrettable, and the surface area of those 3 windows was so large that it couldn’t be dimmed sufficiently with screens or cardboard. But now I’m in the process of overcoming one thing and another.  However formless the scratch may be, it was done immediately from nature (but in great haste) while the work on the windows was going on, and you’ll see from it that one can now obtain nice effects and vary them greatly. And I prefer to send it to you rather than explain the matter in words.  Anyway, I now have the light in the studio pretty well under control, and, if I’ve spotted a figure in another house I can re-create it fairly well at home if I pay attention to the lighting, and adjust my light accordingly. How great was the quantity of light? Did it fall onto the figure from in front, from behind, from the right, from the left, from above, from below?  I think you’ll be pleased by it when you come sometime. 
   The cupboard is fine too.  It was a tricky job, because the blinds were too wide for the windows and had to be altered. But it’s finished for now, and only now do I have the full enjoyment of the studio, and it almost corresponds with what I seek. Later I may get a small room in the attic as well — if there’s some old wood again.  A highly picturesque and distinctive thing could be made there. But this is a minor point.  But the studio is 10 times better. It’s going to cost me more now than I had thought, though, because so many changes had to be made to the old blinds.  So I wanted to ask you, since I’ve promised to pay something on 1 March, send a day earlier rather than a day later, if you can. 
   I wager you can understand that the studio is utterly transformed as a result — Oh, I find it such a delight — I was driven to distraction because I couldn’t get it right. I spoke of good news about your patient, but I think it’s only half a good sign that she wants to go back to her country, although as you say there’s little to be said about the future until she’s better. May the spring do her good. Well, old chap, I’m writing in haste and still have a lot of work to do — I’m immensely pleased with the changes to the windows. It’s effective for the time being, as far as I can tell. You must remember how the light was too harsh and couldn’t be altered when you visited this summer. From the scratch, you’ll probably be able to see that now one can vary it endlessly and reproduce effects one sees in small houses. The advantage that one then has is that whereas in those small houses one can’t stand back at the proper distance to draw the figures, one can in the studio. Adieu, with a firm handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Tonight I’ll probably even dream of chaps in sou’westers and oilskins on which the light falls and creates remarkable glancing lights that accentuate the form.  My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and the enclosure. The news about your patient seems to me most favourable, congratulations, I consider that the recovery from that anaemia is undoubtedly due to there truly being hope and zest for life in the heart once more as a result of her experiencing sympathy and goodness.  The heart that is fainting May grow full to o’erflowing And they who behold it,  Shall wonder and know not  That God at its fountains, Far off — has been raining. You will now have received, at least I sent it yesterday afternoon, a very rough sketch of a watercolour. This in answer to your question about it.  Yet it wasn’t done just now. I began it a few months ago, and since then it has had a lick or two now and again. Has remained in a rough-hewn state, though. I’ve since done many studies, that is drawings, of figures and especially of heads too. Precisely with an eye to such scenes as this sketch depicts, in which the finishing consists of putting texture and character into the heads, hands and feet especially. Why am I sending it? — because I believe that in it you can see more clearly than in a number of other sketches that I’ve done in watercolour that I see things in strong colours — fresh in a grey haze. However unfinished and deficient, here’s a part of the street of the kind I try to depict in the Geest district or the Jewish quarter. This sketch isn’t a chance thing; I can get all kinds of scenes I see up to this level with this fairly expressive colour and tone. Now if you compare this sheet with the lithographs and drawings of heads sent this winter, you’ll clearly see from those various failures what I’m aiming for. 
  Those large studies of heads, for instance, of which I have many more with sou’westers, with shawls and white hats and top hats and caps, for example — they’re intended for compositions like the one I’m sending now. But I’ll have to get through still more failures. For I believe that with watercolour much depends on great dexterity and working quickly. One has to work in the half wet to obtain harmony, and there isn’t much time for second thoughts.  So it’s not a matter of finishing them one by one — no, one has to do those 20 or 30 heads practically at once, one after the other.  Here are a couple of nice sayings about watercolour. ‘There’s something diabolical about watercolour,’4 and the other is by Whistler, who said, yes, I did that in two hours, but I worked for years to be able to do it in two hours. So enough about this — I like watercolour enough never to abandon it completely, I mess about with it constantly.  But the basis for everything is knowledge of the figure. So that one can readily draw fellows and females and children in every possible action. I’m working mostly on that, for I don’t think one can get to what I want by another route.  And I try to raise myself to a higher standard of expertise and skill, more in general rather than worrying about finishing a particular sketch, say. When I’ve been drawing for a month I do a few watercolours, for instance, by way of throwing out the sounding lead. Then each time I see that I’ve found a thing or two but that new difficulties have arisen. I then start slogging away once more to overcome them. 
   As to the paint, it really is finished, and what’s more, because of one or two fairly heavy expenditures, I’m starving rather than just hard up.  Spring is coming and I’d like to do some painting again. So that is in part why I’m not watercolouring at the moment. But nonetheless I’m working on it indirectly, and because of the changes to the studio, now that I’ll be able to study more chiaroscuro effects, I’ll also increasingly work with the brush in Black and White drawings too, and put in shadows and even tints6 in washes with a neutral tint, sepia, indian ink and Cassel earth, and heighten lights with Chinese white.  Do you remember bringing me pieces of natural chalk last summer? I tried to work with it then but couldn’t. So I was left with a few pieces that I took up again these past few days; enclosed a scratch done with it. As you see, it’s a warm, unusual black. I’d very much like you to bring some more, this summer say. It has one great advantage — the firm pieces are much easier to hold while sketching than a thin stick of conté, which has nothing to grip and breaks all the time. So it’s marvellous for sketching out of doors.  Well, old chap — hard to put everything in words, and I didn’t want to answer your question about watercolour in words alone. I shouldn’t like anyone to see just this sketch, because I myself find nothing good in it apart from the general appearance, and will go on wrestling with the figures until I get into them in watercolour what they were beginning to get in the lithograph, namely more texture and character. 
   It’s not pleasant to do sketches like the enclosed and then be unable to finish them. I hate this so much myself that I do them very rarely, purely to see whether I’ve found this or that and how far I’ve got. But I have hope and interest again now precisely because I have a large number of studies behind me.  I think the changes to the studio will give me a push forwards, not the first day but when I’ve fiddled about with things for a few months.  Because now, using models at home, I can study some of the effects like those in the watercolour I sent deuced well.   Here are the windows with the bottom part closed off so that the light falls on the group of figures from above. I can position them like this in the studio, and then get the glancing lights, say, on the figures from above. As in the watercolour. I’ve already sought this with the orphan man, the woman and the children — I’m getting splendid things. There’s no lack of desire on my part to make them, but I’m preparing myself for new failures which I hope, however, will have something in them that gives encouragement rather than making one lose hope, even if they are failures.  A lot of what you sent was immediately gone and I wish you had some more, but decide what suits you best. I have so much work now that I can vary it as I please. I long for you to come, specifically so that I can show you the studies and talk about the work. Adieu, thanks again — with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   They were very big pieces of natural chalk you brought last year — those are what I mean: precisely because they’re bigger, one needn’t use a holder. 
    Of course now I can search for the poses of the figures for as long and as much and as minutely as I like, while still remaining broadly true to what I saw.  I’d like to try this again, as a watercolour, for example. And really work to get somewhere with it. I feel that there’s now more opportunity for figure painting in the studio. When I sometimes tried this summer, before the changes, the figures took on such a neutral, cold colour that one didn’t feel a strong desire to paint. The picturesque quality went, so to speak, as soon as they came into that strong light. 
   Do you know what I’ll need very badly for that? — some different pieces of fabric, brown, grey &c., to get the right background colour. In the case overleaf the wall is white with panelling painted grey, the floor darker. One can re-create the locality much more accurately by paying attention to things like that. I already have several things for it, and also have various REAL clothes. Yesterday, for example, bought a remarkably picturesque patched smock of coarse linen. I always keep an eye open for that kind of thing; if one gives it some thought one gets much more satisfaction from one’s models than if one leaves it entirely to chance.  I have a love for the studio such as a bargee would have for his boat. I believe I’ll get it right. But my purse doesn’t always permit what I would like. Yet they are lasting things that one buys in this way, and now I have an opportunity that I may not have later, perhaps.  The changes to the studio present me with more indirect costs than direct ones. For I won’t consider it finished before I have various things that I need to make it practical.  You will have many expenses because of your patient — for my part I needn’t sit still if you can’t send anything extra at the moment. For that matter, you sent something extra not long ago. So I’d like to emphasize that I can manage if need be. 
   But I have a fire inside me to press on and make good progress. There’s also another stimulus, namely that Rappard is making an effort too, more than in the past, and I want to keep up with him so that we can get on better and probably be of more help to each other. He has painted far more than I and drawn for longer, but there’s still a similarity in the level we’re at. I concede to him as to painting, but I don’t want to lag behind him in drawing. What I would like to see happen is that he and I go on in the same direction, namely the figures from the people, scenes in a soup kitchen, Hospital &c. He’s coming to visit me soon, he’s promised, and I’d like to reach some sort of agreement with him as regards making a series of drawings from the people that we could lithograph, for example, if it was good enough — not otherwise. That and in fact a pile of other things make me long to press on vigorously. In any case, I dare to promise you better drawings soon, whether you can send something or whether it’s inconvenient. The changes to the studio in themselves, to the extent that they’re now finished, already enable me to tackle certain things. But the road would have fewer obstacles if you could send me something extra soon. Otherwise I foresee that I’ll come up against various things, whether drawing materials or taking a model or making some more changes. 
   I say ‘better drawings’; that is relatively. There are some among the studies of heads — orphan men &c. that I still have here — that I won’t immediately do better, since nature is definitely in them, and something I’m not yet satisfied with, of course, but of which equally I don’t yet dare say that I’ll do it so much better tomorrow or the day after.  But by better drawings I mean something else, namely that I’ll approach them differently and try to put more chiaroscuro in them, which is something rarely if at all found in my studies of this winter.  And I now dare promise you that in any event.  Tomorrow I’ll have a house full of people, namely the woman’s mother and the woman’s youngest sister and a lad from the neighbourhood, and these people will pose with the rest of my household for the drawing for which this is the first scratch.  Rappard is also working hard with models, and in my view there’s no better way. Especially if one stays loyal to one model, one comes to see more and more in the person. So this letter supplements my letter of yesterday in the sense that you can see from it that today I’ve made a plan for a new watercolour in the same genre as the one I sent you, and tomorrow I’ll get the models for it. I hope to reach a higher standard with this one than in the one I sent. Shall I succeed??? I can’t tell in advance.  I’m starting on it even though there are still things I lack. But I have one thing I didn’t have in the past, and that’s the better light. And that’s worth more to me than any amount of paint. If you can run to paint as well, please do so, but I’ve already had so much from you and am so dissatisfied with the result up to now in many respects that I hardly dare ask. Anyway, I still have hope that, just as in algebra the product of two negatives will be positive, so the result of failures may be successes.  Adieu, and best wishes for your patient, or rather your convalescent. Ever yours, Vincent 
    That watercolour became too unclear, partly due to the paper, which wasn’t right for it. But I saw how the studio is now infinitely more suitable for colour and will of course not give up after this first trial. That was how the morning passed, though, and I devoted the afternoon to a drawing in natural chalk, the one piece I had left from this summer. I’m sending it herewith. I don’t consider it sufficiently finished yet, but as a sketch from life perhaps there’s something of life in it — and some human sentiment. Better from now on. This drawing therefore leaves the question of watercolour where it was, but gives a provisional answer to what you wrote after I sent you a small scratch to give you an idea of the effect of the windows on the studio. If you want to do me a very great favour, send me some pieces of natural chalk by post. That natural chalk has a soul and life — I find something dead in conté.  Two violins may look more or less the same on the outside — when they’re played one sometimes turns out to have a beautiful sound that the other doesn’t have. Natural chalk has lots of sound or tone. I would almost say that natural chalk understands what one wants, listens with intelligence and obeys, while conté is indifferent and doesn’t cooperate. 
   Natural chalk has a true gypsy soul. Send me some, if it isn’t asking too much of you. Who knows if now, with better light and natural chalk and lithographic crayon, I shan’t succeed in doing something for illustrated magazines. Current events — that’s what they wanted. If by that they meant things like illuminations for the king’s birthday, say, that would give me precious little enjoyment. But if it pleased the gentlemen to include under current events scenes from the everyday life of the people, I’d have nothing against doing my very best for those. When I have some more natural chalk, I’ll again do a few figures of orphan men with it. And you’ll get completely different compositions of soup distributions, of which this is now the first. No doubt you’ll again think this format rather large4 — but I believe that after a period of working with models I’ll 
   be able to make the figures so forceful that the size makes no difference, and will even be necessary. That needn’t rule out a smaller size, and I can always reduce them. There’s much in this rough sketch that bothers me, but I know for sure that I’ll soon make progress. Can you understand when you see this band of people together that I feel at home with them? Lately I read the following in Felix Holt the Radical by Eliot. The people I live among have the same follies and vices as the rich — only they have their own forms of folly and vice — and they have not what are called the refinements of the rich to make their faults more bearable. It doesn’t much matter to me — I’m not fond of those refinements but some people are and find it difficult to feel at home with such persons as have them not. I wouldn’t have put it in those words myself, but I’ve sometimes felt the same.  As a painter I feel completely at home with them and not just content, yet I find a character in them that sometimes makes me think of gypsies — at any rate something as picturesque. 
   Since I’ve been so busy writing letters of late, I’ll probably not write again before the tenth. Send the usual no later if you can, for I’ve promised Leurs6 to pay something around that time. I must do that before I can get one or two things that I’ll be needing. The fact is that I plan to buy various things which he’s had for a long time and which he’ll let me have cheap, supposedly at cost price. Above all, there are some sheets of painting paper of a coarse variety that’s no longer in demand but suits me better than the smooth kind. You’d do me a huge favour with the natural chalk. Adieu, best wishes with everything, especially with your patient. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, I hadn’t intended to write again so soon, but I’m trying to make drawings of various kinds, as you know. And now today I did another sketch1 with the rest of that piece of natural chalk, and then I gave it a sepia wash. I believe the natural chalk has various characteristics that make it an outstanding means of depicting some things from nature. This morning I went for a walk outside the city in the meadows beyond Zuid Buitensingel, where Maris first lived and where the rubbish dump is. For a long time I stood looking there, in front of a row of the most gnarled, twisted and disoriented pollard willows I’ve ever seen. They lined the edge of a vegetable garden — freshly dug — and were reflected in a small, dirty ditch — very dirty — but where blades of spring foliage were already glittering. But that brown, rough bark — the turned-over earth — in which one could see the fertility, so to speak — all that had something peculiarly warm in the dark, strong tones that again made me think of natural chalk. So that when I have some again I hope to tackle landscape with it. Although the accompanying sketch is very unfinished, it seemed to me that there could be things in it that corresponded with your intention — and again it’s a sketch from life. Don’t think that I count it a quality if there isn’t enough fullness of detail. Far from it. But the fullness of detail that both you and I would like to see doesn’t consist in details added later, I believe, but should be more present at once than it is now. Because the freshness mustn’t be lost and, provided the impression is correct, there’s sometimes expression in what is relatively unfinished. However, I’ll naturally work at getting more variation in the tones. I’m relatively indifferent to putting in details, but removing more of the rough edges is definitely my aim. That’s to say, keeping closer to the form. Although there isn’t enough of that in it yet, there’s still so much difference in the general effect through that little bit of sepia that I thought that, in combination with the one from yesterday, you’d be able to see how that natural chalk can be used in several ways. I wrote to Rappard about natural chalk yesterday, 
   because I had to write to him anyway about things to do with lithography. And since I wanted to send him some croquis done with it, I used it to draw our infant in various poses. Well, I discovered that it’s also very suitable for croquis. One can also get half-tones in it by using breadcrumbs. Only the very deepest shadows are perhaps less easy to get, but then, certainly in many cases, one can use lithographic crayon — which is also warm. I believe that you can already see from the figures that the studio is better now as regards the light. Isn’t everything outside beautiful at the moment, don’t you agree? I have many plans — you will understand that. You know that I’m busy with lots of different things. But I’d also like so much to learn different methods, because that’s a stimulus to work hard, and one gets more ideas as a result. I wish I’d thought of this natural chalk before, because it’s preferable to many other things. It’s also not as hard as conté, that’s to say that it doesn’t scratch as much. It’s not that I would like you to send me some more because I wouldn’t be able to work otherwise; but I’ve written about it because I’d then be able to do many things with it in addition to the normal work. Have I already written to you about those two large etchings by Israëls, a man lighting his pipe6 and an interior of a labourer’s dwelling? How beautiful they are. I think it mightily good of Israëls that he carries on etching, the more so since all the others, so to speak, have given it up, despite the enthusiasm with which the etching club was started at the time. At any rate, most haven’t made any progress in etching, and when they make one now it’s no better or more complete than what they made years ago. Yet old Israëls is still young enough to make progress despite his grey hairs, and huge progress at that — and I think that is true youth and evergreen energy. By Jove, if the others had done the same, what beautiful Dutch etchings would have come into the world. I have 2 small etchings by Israëls, perhaps even his very first, a girl with a spade in a small garden and a woman with a basket on her back. Do you know them? I believe they were published by the Belgian etchers’ society. So with that one piece of chalk I’ve already done 2 sketches and still have some left, and small croquis as well. In future I may use little else for ordinary work. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of 9 March and for the enclosure. Is your patient making good progress? I hope that no news about her is good news. If it was as cold in your part of the world as it was here last week, she wouldn’t have been best pleased. While for your part you say you sometimes long for us to be able to talk rather more about various things in art, for my part I feel that longing constantly, and on occasion very strongly. I would so often dearly like to know your opinion about this or that — about some studies &c., for example whether they might be made into something suitable, or whether it was advisable to press on with something for one purpose or another. I would like so often to have more information about matters which you certainly know more about than I do, and would dearly like to hear more about what’s going on, namely what sorts of thing are being made. This can all be dealt with in part by letter, but writing takes time and one doesn’t get round to it easily, nor can one go into things in sufficient detail. And now in particular — because studies are piling up, rather — I’d give a great deal for us to be able to speak to each other again, and I also long for you to see how much more suitable the studio now is. Anyway, we’ll hope that it won’t be so very, very long before you come to Holland. Rest assured, dear brother, that the sense of the enormous obligation I have to you for your loyal help is always fresh and vivid inside me.
   It would be difficult for me to express all my many thoughts about that. It remains the cause of a kind of disappointment to me that I don’t yet see in my drawings what I wanted to have in them. The difficulties really are many and great, and not to be overcome at a stroke. Making headway is a kind of miner’s labour that doesn’t go as quickly as one would wish and as others expect. But if one is faced by such labour, the first things one must hang on to are patience and faith. In fact I don’t think much about the difficulties, precisely because if one were to fret about them one would get dizzy or become confused. A weaver who must control and interweave many threads has no time to philosophize about how they fit together, but rather he’s so absorbed in his work that he doesn’t think but acts, and feels how it can and must work out rather than being able to explain it. Even if neither you nor I come up with particular plans etc. when we can speak to each other again, this feeling that something is coming into being may strengthen on both sides. And I would want that.
   This morning I was with Van der Weele, who was working on a very beautiful painting of diggers, horses and sand-carts. Big. It was beautiful in tone and colour — a grey morning mist — it was manly in drawing and composition, it had style and character — in short, it was by far the most beautiful and most vigorous work of his I’ve ever seen. He had painted three very beautiful, thorough studies, as well as an old white horse2 and a fine small landscape in the dunes too. This week he may come to have a look at my studio, which I would like very much. I saw Breitner briefly in the street last week. His position in Rotterdam is reassuring for him — but just this morning Van der Weele had had a note from him to say that he was ill again. To tell you the truth, the impression I got when I saw him again wasn’t very favourable; in fact I found a je ne sais quoi of disappointment in him, and he talked rather oddly about his work. Now I must tell you about a surprise I’ve had. I received a letter from Pa, very cordial and cheerful it seemed to me, with 25 guilders in it. Pa wrote that he’d received some money he hadn’t expected and that he wanted to let me share in it. Wasn’t that awfully kind? It makes me blush, though. But there’s one thought that instinctively springs to mind. Can it be, perhaps, that Pa has heard from someone or other that I’m living in poverty or some such thing? I wouldn’t care for it if something like that was the motive, for in my opinion this view of my circumstances wouldn’t be accurate. And could cause Pa concern that isn’t entirely appropriate. You will understand my intention better than Pa if I were to try to explain such a thing to him. In my view I’m often very rich, not in money, but rich (although not every day exactly) because I’ve found my work — have something which I live for heart and soul and which gives inspiration and meaning to life. 
   My mood varies, of course, but nonetheless I have a certain average serenity. I have a certain faith in art, a certain trust that it’s a powerful current that drives a person — although he has to cooperate — to a haven, and in any case I consider it such a great happiness if a person has found his work4 that I don’t count myself among the unfortunate. I mean, even if I were in certain fairly serious difficulties, and even if there were sombre days in my life, I wouldn’t like it and wouldn’t consider it right if someone were to count me among the unfortunate. You say something in your letter that I also feel on occasion — ‘Sometimes I don’t know how I’ll get through it.’ You see, I often feel that, often and in more than one respect, not only financially but in art itself and life in general. Yet is that unusual? Doesn’t everyone with a little enterprise and energy have such moments?  In my view we all have moments of melancholy, of stress, of anguish, to a greater or lesser extent, and this is a condition of every self-conscious human life. Some apparently have no self-consciousness. But those who have such moments, although then sometimes in an anxious state, aren’t unfortunate because of that, and nothing unusual is happening to them. And sometimes there’s a solution, sometimes new inner energy comes and one gets up from them, until perhaps finally, one fine day, one no longer gets up from them – so be it – but there’s nothing unusual in this and, I repeat, it’s inherent in human life, in my view.  Pa’s letter was in reply to a letter of mine which I remember very well was cheerful, because I told him about the changes to the studio, and I did not write to Pa about anything that could give rise to the idea that I was in any kind of difficulty of a financial or other nature. Indeed, Pa doesn’t write anything like that, and his letter is cheerful and cordial, but it came so unexpectedly that it may not be too far-fetched to suggest that I instinctively got the idea: can it be that Pa’s worried about me? If I’m mistaken in this, it would hardly be appropriate to write as if that were the chief impression I gained from something so cordial. The chief impression, in fact, being that I have a feeling of gratitude about receiving something that enables me to do various things that I couldn’t have done otherwise. I’m sharing my thoughts about this with you, though, partly because, should you notice at some point that Pa’s worried about me, you’ll be better able than I am to give Pa the reassurance I would wish him to have. 
   You will also gather from this that I’ve had a remarkable windfall. I intend to use it to get everything back in order for watercolours. I’ll settle up with Leurs and do several more things to the studio to make it more practical.  It sometimes seems to me that the prices of the various drawing and painting materials have sometimes been dreadfully inflated. To such an extent that many feel they’re prevented from painting as a result. One of my ideals would be to have more places like the one at The Graphic, say, where people who want to work can find all the materials, on condition that they have a certain evident ability and energy. Just as in the past Cadart enabled many to etch who wouldn’t have been able to etch because of the costs if they’d had to pay for it out of their own pocket. I’m greatly privileged compared with many others, but all the same I can’t do everything that I have the heart and enthusiasm to undertake. The costs are so many, beginning with the model and food and accommodation, and ending with different paints and brushes. And that, too, is a loom where different threads must be kept apart.  Yet we all face this — but precisely because anyone who paints or draws is faced with this, and is nearly overwhelmed by it if alone, why don’t more painters join hands to work together like soldiers forming ranks? And, above all, why are those branches of art that are the least expensive so despised? Regarding the natural chalk — I don’t know whether what I got from you came from the Plaats, but I’m sure that I got it from you at the time of your visit last summer, or perhaps in Etten still. I found a very small remnant at a chemist’s, about six pieces but all in small bits. Bear it in mind. When I asked Leurs about it again he told me that Jaap Maris had often asked him for it. I’ve done two more sketches with it, a cradle6 and one similar to one I’d already sent in which I used a lot of sepia wash.
   As to what you write concerning that one sketch about the two figures one above the other, it’s mainly an effect of the perspective. But also of the big difference in size between the small child and the woman on the basket. What bothers me more than that line of the composition is something that you’ve also noticed, by the way — that the two figures are too equal in strength. In part this is because the natural chalk lacks some tones, and one would like to put in greater strengths with lithographic crayon, say. But in my view the main reason is that I don’t always have the time to work as elaborately as I would like. It’s possible to search for the different tones more elaborately if one repeatedly comes back to a drawing. But often I have to work in quite a hurry. I daren’t ask too much of my models. If I paid them more elaborately I could ask for more elaborate poses, that’s to say longer and more. Now I often consider that I receive more from them in effort than I give them in money. Nonetheless, I believe there is moreover another, weightier reason, namely that I must become much more skilled than I am if I’m to be at all content with myself. And I hope that gradually I’ll work more deftly and more elaborately in the same amount of time that I now devote to it. Well, brother — best wishes with your patient — I long, for instance, for another of your descriptions of an aspect of Paris. And rest absolutely assured that I’ll be very glad to manage as best I can with the means I have through your loyal help, and that I don’t consider them inadequate for ordinary purposes either, and that I think about ways of making even more and better use of them, and lay the blame chiefly on myself if I can’t achieve certain things with them. Adieu, with a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, You’ve so often shown me a glimpse of Paris through your descriptions, this time I’m letting you have a look out of my window at the snow-covered yard. I’m adding a glimpse of a corner of the house;1 they’re two impressions of the same winter’s day. Poetry surrounds us everywhere, but getting it onto paper is something that unfortunately doesn’t go as readily as looking. I did a watercolour of the above after which this scratch is done; however, I don’t think it lively or vigorous enough.
   I believe I’ve already written to you that I found a little more natural chalk here in town. I’m also working with that. In my view this has been the most real part of this winter, those cold days we had last week. It was mightily beautiful with the snow — and curious skies. The melting of the snow today was almost more beautiful. But it was typical winter weather, if I may call it that — it was the kind of weather that brings back old memories, when the most ordinary things have a look such that one instinctively associates them with stories from the age of diligences and mail-coaches. Here’s a scratch, for example, that I did in that kind of daydream. It shows a gentleman who has had to spend the night at a village inn due to the late arrival of a diligence or some such reason. Now he has risen early, and while he orders a glass of brandy for the cold he pays the innkeeper’s wife (a woman with a peasant’s cap). But it’s still very early in the morning, ‘the crack of dawn’, — he must catch the mail-coach — the moon is still shining and the glistening snow can be seen through the window of the taproom — and the objects cast oddly whimsical shadows.  This story is really nothing at all, and the scratch is nothing too, but from one thing and another you’ll perhaps understand what I mean, namely that of late everything had a je ne sais quoi that made one feel like scribbling it down on paper.  In short, the whole of nature is an inexpressibly beautiful Black and White exhibition when there are those snow effects.
   Now I’m doing scratches anyway, I’m adding a very superficial one of a drawing in natural chalk, the girl at the cradle, done in the same way as the woman and the child you wrote about. This natural chalk really is odd stuff. The other scratch of a skipper is after a drawing which has a lot of washes with neutral tint and sepia. It wouldn’t surprise me in the least if the little I’ve sent you recently struck you as being a rather meagre result. Indeed, I believe it could hardly be otherwise. There’s something fated about it: that in order to see the singularity of the work in Black and White, one must always take the whole into account, and it’s impossible to do so all the time. I mean, there’s a certain difference between making 10 drawings and making 100 drawings or sketches or studies. Not, to be sure, because of the quantity — leave the quantity aside — but what I want to say is this: in Black and White there’s a certain mildness which enables one to draw one and the same figure that one finds beautiful in perhaps 10 different poses, whereas with watercolour, say, or if one painted it, one would do it in only one pose. Now assume that in this 10 there are 9 bad ones. I sincerely hope the ratio of good to bad won’t always be like this, but let’s assume for now that it is. If you yourself were to be at the studio now, I don’t think a week would pass without me presenting you with not one but a certain number of studies — and it would amaze me if you couldn’t always pick out from that certain number one or two things in which you found something attractive.
   While that wouldn’t mean that the rest had been done for nothing, since studies that fail in some respects turn out one day to have a purpose and to be of use for some new composition after all. So for this reason I believe that when you come here again you’ll find certain things about which you can probably give me some tips. So, for example, for me, who doesn’t have even the slightest knowledge of Lhermitte’s drawings (you know I did enquire about them)8 and does know Cicéri’s watercolours as well as his old lithographic drawing examples, but nothing at all of his present drawings in black and white10 — so, as I say, it’s rather difficult for me to understand exactly what you mean when you wrote about a certain scratch: ‘Couldn’t you do something that would be somewhat on the lines of the drawings mentioned?’ I’m sure that both those artists are infinitely more advanced than I am — but still, that idea of yours might be feasible — I believe I’ll learn things myself, won’t I? And it won’t be an impossibility. And I wanted to say this to you again — in my view the position is that once I’ve managed to make something suitable for that purpose, there’s a certain mildness in Black and White that would enable someone to be highly productive in that direction once found. Not without continuous labour, of course, but I face that now anyway. So should it be that the drawings in natural chalk I sent you aren’t what you intended, even though I had your tip in mind when I did them, don’t let that discourage you, and feel at liberty to come back to that point, the more often the better. And be assured that once I’ve grasped your intention I’ll be prepared, for example, to do as I said above — and do 10 of them to get one good one. Anyway, when you come to the studio sometime, I believe you’ll see that I have a certain level of activity, and I hope you’ll continue to see me in that way, won’t you?, and that you also understand that, although someone with a certain level of activity, even if it’s for himself — or rather without his work having an immediate destination — is nonetheless working, it would be doubly encouraging if one could find a destination. This also applies to possible work for illustrated magazines.
   These past few days I’ve been re-reading ‘Gedroogde kruiden’ by Fritz Reuter with enormous pleasure. It’s just like Knaus or Vautier, say. Do you know a draughtsman called Régamey? His work has great character, I have woodcuts by him, among them drawings done in prison12 — and Gypsies13 and Japanese. When you come you must see my woodcuts again. I’ve got some new ones since last time. It seemed to you perhaps as if the sun shone brighter and everything had acquired a new charm. At any rate, I believe this is always the effect of a serious love, and that’s a delightful thing. And I believe those who say that one doesn’t think clearly then are mistaken, for it’s then that one thinks very clearly and does more than otherwise. And love is something eternal, it changes its aspect but not its foundation. And there’s the same difference between someone who loves and the same man before as between a lamp that is lit and one that isn’t. The lamp was there and was a good lamp, but now it gives light as well and has its proper function. And one becomes calmer regarding many things, and precisely because of that one is more fit for one’s work.
   I can find no words for how beautiful the old courtyards are here. And although Israëls does it perfectly, so to speak, I find it strange that so relatively few pay them any attention. Here in The Hague every day, so to speak, I see a world which a great many pass by and which is very different from what most are making. And wouldn’t dare say this if I hadn’t had the experience of figure painters actually passing it by as well, and remembered walking with them and, when I was struck by this or that figure we encountered, hearing repeatedly ‘Oh, but those filthy folk’ or ‘that sort of people’ — in short, expressions one wouldn’t expect from a painter. Yes, that sometimes made me stop and think. I remember, among others, a conversation with Henkes, who often saw and sees so well, which absolutely astonished me. It’s just as if they deliberately avoid the most serious, the most beautiful, in short, voluntarily muzzle themselves and clip their wings. And while I gradually gain more respect for some, with others I can’t help thinking that they’ll lapse into sterility if they carry on in the same way. And the old Bohème was very strong on exactly that point, that it was productive. And — and some say la Bohème is no good, but be careful, there are some who want to grab every last bit in the barrel and — and — and will get the lid on their nose. Put out the candle — so be it — but it will bring no good to snuff it out prematurely. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
    
    My dear Theo, Many sincere thanks for your letter and the enclosure. I was pleased to learn about your patient in more detail from it, the more so since it seemed to me that these reports may be called highly favourable. Isn’t what they call a white tumour1 something that sometimes occurs of its own accord in anaemia when certain malignant elements are in the blood? I don’t know for sure, but I believe that in itself the abscess in question isn’t something unusual and, given the proper treatment, not in the least dangerous. And otherwise you write various good things. What you write about her influence on others is very nice. I believe in things like that — the influence exercised by a good person sometimes extends a long way. The comparison with leaven is well taken. Two good people — man and woman united — wanting and intending the same, steeped in the same earnestness, what couldn’t they achieve! I’ve thought about that often. For by uniting, the force for good is not only doubled but doubled many times — as if raised to a higher power, to put it in mathematical terms. Well – then your description of the house and its surroundings — the cab-stand is very good. Stands out from other townscapes by you because of the more distinctive staffage — the cab-stand is excellent. Couldn’t you arrange for the figure with the red nose to pose for me sometime?
   I’m pleased that you’ve spoken to friend Wisselingh — so he’s come back to Paris — still in Cottier’s firm? Would you give him my regards when you have an opportunity? If he ever comes to Holland, a visit from him — which he has actually promised me by the way — would give me great pleasure. I’d like you to encourage him not to forget this, I still have various things to ask him about London. Has he seen the lithographs? I’d like to make his acquaintance all over again, I always found much in him that was attractive, and he knows a great deal and has a true and original feeling in matters of art. In short, is someone with character. The little scratch overleaf is after a drawing I began early this morning and toiled away at all day. It’s perhaps the best I’ve done so far, at least as regards light and shade. I’m sending you the scratch (although I can’t possibly work on this paper so that the same strengths come into it, it’s out of proportion — and the drawing has more foreground) because I believe you’ll see in it what I gain by the change in the light in the studio. This figure is posed against the light and something more than an outline is required in order to depict it, since light from a single source gives character to the form and brings the strengths into harmony and rapport with each other. And in the first place this approach entails the difficulties of depicting what one has before one’s eyes, but in addition something else that requires a lot of hard work, namely the question of how to position a figure and to have the light fall such that the character comes out at its best and most perfect. One must have analyzed what one sees inside or outside as regards the light in such a way that one can re-create it.  
   I’m very pleased that you write that you have the natural chalk. It didn’t come in the post today, however, although you write that you’ve sent it. Should you have forgotten it, let me remind you about it again, and if you’ve already sent it, no doubt it will come soon. I again have a stock of lithographic crayon, and wanted to combine the natural chalk with that, which I believe must be possible. This week I was busy drawing Wheelbarrows; one chap seen from behind has turned out fairly real, I think. Van der Weele came by, we held a viewing of woodcuts, very cosily on a wheelbarrow, for I’d just been working with a model. He’s also going to start collecting them, and is to take steps to get some from the estate of Stam the wood engraver that he collected. I hadn’t written before that little by little I have almost the whole Graphic complete, from the beginning in 1870. Not everything, of course, there’s too much lumber for that, but the beauties from it. When one sees it, Herkomer’s work from it for example, arranged together instead of dispersed amid a mass of insignificant things, in the first place it becomes more enjoyable and easier to view, but then one also begins to see the peculiarities of the various masters better, and the great difference between the draughtsmen. 
   How much I would like to see something by Lhermitte. I can’t tell you how happy I feel because of the improvements to the studio, and how preoccupied I am once more with all manner of figures that I must do. Van der Weele saw the studies of heads from this winter among others — I’m certain they’ll be of use to me — as, indeed, will the other studies. Do you know what pleased me? You remember that Van der W. also came by one time this winter8 — it’s months ago now — I was working on studies of Diggers at the time — one of which I tried to lithograph. He saw them but they didn’t seem to interest him, far from it. Now he has evidently had diggers pose recently for the painting10 he’s working on, or observed them at work somewhere — anyway, he has taken a close look at diggers in nature. When we came to those diggers while looking through my studies, the way he spoke about them was very different from what it was this winter — at least he didn’t say so readily ‘this or that is different’. This time I myself said nothing at all about them. But more and more I begin to see both in myself and others how mistaken one can often be when one thinks this or that ‘isn’t so’ or ‘doesn’t look right’; above all, one often says it instinctively when it isn’t applicable, I myself no less than others. One imagines one knows for certain, but has to retract if one wants to be fair.
   Your description of the cab-stand and the venerable urinal and the bills stuck on it is really very good — it’s a great pity you don’t draw it. Speaking of bills, the place where they’re put up is sometimes a curious parody of the bill, or the other way round. To mention just one of many — at the entrance to the Lombard or pawnshop I saw a bill with the following words in big letters 

 
Prospectus


 
Eigen Haard.

 NB. As you probably know, Eigen Haard is a magazine. I thought this one rather good; if one kept an eye out for them one would find even better ones. Gavarni once came up with one, namely this. The entrance of a house with the announcement ‘Children weaned here’. Standing on the doorstep are a woman with a most unprepossessing appearance and a fellow with a short pipe in his mouth, evidently the people from the institution. A bill is posted on the wall. Lost a child — so and so. Similarly, At the meeting-place of the brotherhood is the sign of an estaminet where several drunken fellows are squabbling. Rappard wants to send a large painting to the Amsterdam exhibition. It shows 4 tile painters around a table. I’ve heard good things about it indirectly.
   Although it isn’t part of my plan at present to do large paintings for exhibitions, I wouldn’t like to work less than Rappard, say. I even find something encouraging in the fact that one person can work in this direction and another in that, and yet still feel a sympathy. Rivalry stemming from envy is completely different from trying to do one’s best to make the work as good as possible precisely out of respect for each other. Extremes meet15 — I don’t see the slightest value at all in envy, but I would despise a friendship that didn’t entail making an effort to keep up with one another. What I’m beginning to long for very much at times is to work with several models at once. To do drawings that are slightly more complicated. But this desire isn’t pressing — after all, I have enough to do. At Van der Weele’s I saw the studies for his big painting. Those studies were outstanding — conscientious — but anyone with some understanding of how studies from nature are made, and the difference between them and a painting or definitive composition, won’t expect to find the painting in the studies — obviously. One doesn’t see the greatness and unity of the painting in the studies — that’s not surprising. Because the studies are done for the figures, horses or people, it doesn’t matter, the setting is ignored, there’s not enough foreground, background, &c. They don’t look right, and they’re not standing in their place as in the painting. Does everyone understand that when looking at studies? Bear that in mind when you’re looking at mine — especially when sooner or later you see what I still have here. This week, for the fun of it, I set down one or two in a different proportion so that I could merge them into a whole. Through a simple indication of a few lines and washing in a few flat tones of sepia, what for once I’ll call the painting-like quality came into it naturally. I just mean to say — don’t think that I look differently from, say, Van der Weele as regards seeing space in nature. Adieu, write again soon, best wishes. Ever yours, Vincent 
   In this scratch you see something of what I said at the end of this letter — here there’s now no foreground at all — at any rate in the actual study there’s a little more — but if I combine this study with, for instance, one of the diggers, say the one I lithographed — then belonging with this is a large, flat piece of land in front and, for example, a brushwood fence behind, and right at the top something of the sky would be visible, just to indicate where the light comes from. Then perhaps it would become a composition breadthways, and the figure would be in its setting and in its place. If I did all that in the study itself, the figure would be so small that it would be of no use to me as a serious study for the figure. Believe me, the appearance isn’t a tough job, if my studies are good I’m very calm about that point. And Space, Sky, breadth — don’t think that I rationalize them away — but one shouldn’t begin with them, first the foundation — then the roof will follow in its own time. My dear Theo, By chance I’ve finally seen something by Lhermitte — a very superficial reproduction in woodcut. It showed an old woman on a pew. Beside her a kneeling girl. Whatever the shortcomings of the reproduction, it has given me some idea of his work. It reminded me straightaway of Degroux and Legros, for example. There must undoubtedly be many similarities between his work and that of Millet or Breton. However superficial the small woodcut was, it stayed in my mind for days, and I still think of it, precisely because I’d heard about Lhermitte, due to one thing and another, I was on the lookout and searching for something by him. You remember that I wrote to you about him in connection with reviews of the Black and White. I’ve received the natural chalk — many thanks — it’s very good — softer than what I first had from you, though, and the pieces are shorter by half. I would still like to have the harder kind in larger pieces, but I’m very pleased with this. I’ve done a large drawing with it, more specifically with it and lithographic crayon. It’s a drawing of a digger — I took as my model the orphan man you’re familiar with — a bald head bent forward over the black earth3 — it seemed to me to have a certain significance, making one think of ‘in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread’, for instance.
   The appearance of the drawings of the woman with the spade5 and of this digger is such that people won’t think they were done in some complicated way, but won’t give any thought, I believe, to how they were done. Only I think that if I had done them in ordinary conté, something deathly or iron-like would have entered into them that would have made people say immediately: that isn’t life or nature. Through certain greys — through a certain warmth of life and pith in the black — one prevents it being deathly and iron-like. And in my view these little things make it worthwhile to go to the trouble of finding such materials as natural chalk and lithographic crayon. I’m very glad that you sent it. This morning a painter saw these two drawings — it was Nakken, who didn’t come for me but rang my bell in the belief that Van Deventer lived here, but he lives in the other street. I put him right and asked him if he’d like to have a look at the studio. He did so. Since I was working on that digger, that was what he saw first on the easel and he said, ‘That’s strongly drawn and seriously studied’.
   Leaving that remark aside without picking it to pieces, it still gave me pleasure, because I hardly think Nakken would say of a figure that it was well drawn if it wasn’t properly put together. But I attach no further importance to it. I write to you about it because the drawing was the very one in natural chalk, and you can see from this that if you take the trouble to get me some, I for my part like nothing better than to work with it. Now to what degree such drawings could match up to certain charcoal drawings — Lhermitte is an ideal — and reaching that standpoint a long way off — aspiring towards it, though, is an everyday concern. Anyway, when you come sooner or later, we’ll be better able to talk about it. I spoke to Smulders about lithographs recently — he asked me on the street whether I was going to do some more. Which I’d like to do. But I must discuss it with Rappard sometime, and he must first see my studies. It often seems to me that something that would have a raison d’être could be made from figures of workmen.
   The lithographs by Emile Vernier after Millet and Corot and Daubigny have qualities I rate very highly. How one would like to talk to someone with such a mastery of the craft. Not with the aim of making reproductions of paintings, but better to understand what lithography is capable of. Imagine original drawings with those curious greys and that curious rendering of fabric. Bodmer found that — he is original as an artist and at the same time he has what one might call the lithographic spectrum of colours, or rather spectrum of greys. In some respects that’s entirely different from Gavarni’s lithography. With Bodmer they are prints finished like paintings. I mean not only Bodmer’s actual lithographs like At Bas-Bréau and Stags fighting, but the prints from L’Illustration as well, or Monde Illustré. Respect for and a need and desire for advice or correction by others mustn’t, however, become an excuse for standing idle, in my view. To say I don’t need others is premature, however, if on the basis of that one systematically finds others wanting. I’ve always thought printing a miracle, the kind of miracle by which a grain of wheat becomes an ear. An everyday miracle — all the greater because it’s everyday. One sows a single drawing on the stone or in the etching plate and one reaps a multitude. Can you understand that it’s something I think about a great deal while at work, and that I have a great love of it? Anyway, my chief concern now is to ensure that the quality of the seed (namely the drawings themselves) improves, and if it takes a little longer I’ll be content, provided the harvest is better as a result. But I still have my eye on that harvest. Now write again soon and believe me, with a handshake, Ever yours, Vincent 
   I kept this letter for a few days because today, Sunday, I have more time to write. I’m reading Les misérables by V. Hugo. A book of which I have old memories, but at the same time I felt a need to read it again — just as one can feel a strong desire to see some painting again. It’s immensely beautiful, and I find the figure of Monseigneur Myriel or Bienvenu sublime. In your last letter you spoke of ‘exercising influence’ with regard to your patient. That Mgr Myriel reminds me of Corot or Millet — although he was a priest and the other two painters. But because in the world of painting Corot and Millet too, or Breton, awoke so much energy in others which would never have fully developed without them, apart from doing their own work. You know Les misérables, don’t you? — and no doubt the illustrations Brion drew for it14 — very good and convincing. It’s good to read a book like that again, it seems to me, just to keep some feelings and moods alive. The love of man above all, and faith in and consciousness of something higher, in short of the something on High. This afternoon I was engrossed in it for a few hours and then came into the studio — about the time the sun was setting. From the window I looked out on a broad, dark foreground — dug-over gardens and soil, mostly warm black earth, very deep in tone. Running obliquely across that is the little road of yellowish sand with green edges of grass and the thin, spindly poplars. A background of a grey silhouette of the city with the round roof of the station and towers and chimneys. And, by the way, the backs of houses still everywhere – but in the evening everything is brought together by the tone. And so, overseeing the whole, simply a foreground of black, dug-over earth, a road crossing that, a grey silhouette of a city with towers behind, just above that and almost on the horizon the red sun. It was just like a page in Hugo — and something that would certainly have struck you and that you could describe better than I. And I thought of you at the time.
   I’ve already written that I’ve drawn with the natural chalk — yesterday I began a second drawing with it, a woman sewing. Particularly with an eye to chiaroscuro. I believe that when you come to the studio again you’ll soon see that although I no longer talk so much about that plan of figures of workmen for lithography, I’ve borne it in mind all the time. The position is, though, that it’s beginning to weigh on me more and more, in the sense that I want to make my figures more beautiful. I have a sower18 — a mower19 — a woman at the wash-tub20 — a woman miner21 — a woman sewing22 — a digger23 — a woman with a spade24 — the orphan man25 — Prayer before the meal26 — a fellow with a wheelbarrow of manure. Yet more if need be — but I believe you’ll understand that the very making of them, having the models before one, thinking about them, doesn’t lead to one’s being content with the work but rather to the opposite, namely that one says, yes, the same as that but better still and more serious still. Now I wouldn’t be attached to this idea if I thought it was impracticable, but the very fact that these drawings already exist means that the desire to make them better is more a matter of actual toil on them than just an idea. And I haven’t got any further with making a final plan, since I find the execution of it more interesting. It seems to me that these drawings are all striving straight in the direction you meant when you wrote about it recently — although matching those charcoal drawings by Lhermitte, for instance, is a very long way off. You will understand that. Lhermitte’s secret, it seems to me, is none other than that he knows the figure in 
   general — namely the sturdy, severe workman’s figure — through and through, and takes his subjects from the heart of the people. To reach the same level as he — one shouldn’t talk of that — one must work and see how far one gets. Because talking about it would be presumptuous on my part, I believe, while working, on the other hand, would be a sign of respect and trust and faith in artists like him. Have you ever seen anything by an American called Abbey? In New York at the moment there’s a club of draughtsmen who call themselves The Tile Club or The tile painters and some of whose drawings I’ve seen, in a Xmas number of illustrations from Harper’s among other places. I ask because these gentlemen have apparently all been to Paris together, judging by a sheet of humorous sketches by one of them. In my view Abbey is by far the cleverest. His figures often have something of Boughton. Boughton is also a member or honorary member of the club, but is I believe more solid than all the rest of the club put together, and doesn’t make so much noise. But Abbey is very fine all the same. A figure of a woman in the snow by him that I have29 recalls both Boughton and Heilbuth. A large pen drawing of a Christmas party in the age of Washington or slightly earlier31 recalls Henri Pille, for instance. He has style — and that’s a great thing, but Boughton had that even more — especially in the past.
   I write about it because I believe you’ll agree with me that not all Americans are bad. That, on the contrary, there too extremes meet, and that besides a host of noisemakers and bunglers of the most insufferable and impossible sorts there are characters who have the effect of a lily or a snowdrop among thorns. Now I’m going to read a little more of Les misérables, although it’s already late. A book like that warms one up, just like paintings by Dupré and old Millets — or several Decamps’ — it’s written with what’s called verve. I saw that a new volume by Zola has come out: ‘Au bonheur des dames’, if I remember rightly. My dear Theo, I was very glad to get your letter and I thank you sincerely for the enclosure. I’m only sorry that sending it to me probably got you into greater difficulties than you say in your letter. I do hope that you have since been repaid the sum in question.  So Hendrik is back from the East Indies — were he and his family well? Or was illness the reason for their return? In the past Hendrik made a much less favourable impression on me than his two brothers3 — is that your impression too?  I’ve been working with printer’s ink lately — it’s thinned with turpentine and applied with a brush. Gives very deep tones of black. Mixed with some Chinese white, it also gives good greys. By adding more or less turpentine one can even wash very thinly with it.  Ought to be extremely suitable, it seems to me, for use on that paper that Buhot gave you.  We must definitely discuss this question when you come here, and I’ll show you drawings that could be done on it.  A year ago it was a mystery to me how some very deep tones of black could be obtained, but it was at the printer’s that I found a few of them. And thanks to that I can go a little deeper in searching for modelling and chiaroscuro.
   Thank you for your good wishes on my birthday. As it happened, I had a very pleasant day, because just then I had an excellent model for a digger.  I can assure you of this: the work is going better and better with time, and I feel more warmth of life, so to speak, as a result, and I think of you constantly during it, since it’s through you that I’m able to work without fatal obstacles, namely without direct restrictions.  The difficulties are actually a stimulus sometimes. Now the time must come when we can put even more energy into it. My ideal is to work with ever more models, a whole flock of poor folk for whom the studio could be a kind of harbour of refuge6 on cold days, or when they’re out of work or in need.  Where they know that there are fire, food, drink and a few quarters to be earned. At present that’s only on a very small scale, I hope it will grow.  For now I limit myself to just a few, and keep to them — I can’t spare a single one and could use some 
   more. You write about some art lovers who might take my work such as it is sometime, without its becoming a commodity exactly. Well, I really believe that too. If I succeed in putting some warmth and love into the work, then it will find friends. Carrying on working is the thing.  I’m glad your patient is making progress, if only slowly. Here it’s delightful spring weather. The evenings are indescribably beautiful. It will do her good if it’s similar in your part of the world. Is she up already?  I have the orphan man7 again today, and must start getting my bits and pieces ready.  I spoke to Van der Weele again this week, and I expect to see him here again in the next few days.
   You’ll probably be busy with the Salon too. I don’t suppose you can say roughly when you’ll be coming to Holland, can you?  I wish you well — write again when you have a moment. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, Thank you for your letter and the 50 francs enclosed, which were very welcome as always, both the former and the latter. I read what you write about your patient with interest. I understand that you’re in two minds over the matter of posing a certain question — which I shan’t further define here — now or later. And the change of circumstances brought about by her recovery has a more or less critical side because, and this is  what you are actually prepared for (and say so yourself), opposition may be aroused — possibly anyway — let’s hope not. How odd that last point really is. One sees what one does as simple and natural in itself — something self-evident — one is more or less puzzled as to why others don’t find the motives in themselves that compel someone to do such a thing. And would almost draw the conclusion that some people have cauterized certain sensory nerves in themselves — in particular those collectively known as the conscience. Anyway, I pity such people: in my view they travel through life without a compass. Love of one’s fellow man is something one would expect to be able to take for granted in everyone as the basis of just about everything. But some believe there are better foundations. I feel little curiosity about them. This old foundation that has been tested and found good for so many centuries is enough for me. Don’t you find this nicely put? — it’s from Les misérables: If Caesar had given me Glory and war, And if I was forced to forgo My mother’s love, To great Caesar would I say, Take back your sceptre and your chariot, I love my mother more, hey!, I love my mother more. In the context in which this (a student song from the time of the revolution of ’30) occurs, love of my mother stands for love of the Republic, or rather ‘love of mankind’; in other words, quite simply, universal brotherhood.
   A woman, however good and noble she may be by nature, in my view stands in great and immediate danger in today’s society of sinking into the maelstrom of prostitution if she has no means and isn’t protected by her own family. What is more natural than that one should support such a person? And if there’s no other solution when circumstances lead to it, well, then — you must put your heart and soul into it6 and marry her. At least it seems to me that one must make it a principle to continue with this protection once offered until rescue is complete, and to protect with one’s own breast if necessary. Even without a particular love? Perhaps, yes — in that case it’s a marriage of convenience, so be it — but not in the sense of a marriage that one enters into for gain. And now, your particular case differs from the more everyday — such as mine, for instance — because of the singular circumstance that the person in question has a special charm and that there is, I believe, a sympathy of feeling, so that even if the meeting had taken place under entirely different and less dramatic circumstances, you might have been in two minds over the question at issue. In the above you have my thoughts on the question: ‘How far may one go in becoming involved with an unfortunate woman?’ Answer — ‘ad infinitum’. While still emphasizing that staying loyal comes first and foremost in all love, I remind you of your own words that ‘marrying’ (i.e. civil marriage) ‘is such an odd thing’. These words of yours express exactly how it is, and on that point I declare I don’t know which is better or worse, to meddle or not. It’s what they call ‘puzzling’. It puzzles me too — and I for my part wish so much that one had nothing to do with that. I believe it’s well said that ‘when one marries, one marries not only the woman herself but the family 
   too’, which is sometimes more or less fatal and wretched if they’re nasty people. But now about the drawings — I’ve done some more with printer’s ink, and this week I was investigating how to mix the printer’s ink with white, and found that it can be mixed in at least two ways — namely with the white from the tubes of oil paint — and probably even better with the ordinary zinc white in powder form that one can even get at any chemist — in that case diluting it with turpentine, which doesn’t soak through on this paper or leave marks on the reverse like oil — because it dries so quickly and disappears. Printer’s ink has much livelier effects than indian ink. How beautiful Jules Dupré’s work is. In the window at G&C. I saw a small seascape which you no doubt know, and which I’ve been going to have a look at almost every evening11 — but as regards Dupré and similar art — of which one sees so much more in Paris than here — you may be rather spoiled — and not know what an almightily beautiful impression it makes here, where one sees so precious little of it. Have got round to reading the last part of Les misérables — the figure of Fantine — a prostitute — made a deep impression on me12 — oh, I know as well as anyone that in reality one won’t find an exact Fantine — but all the same this character by Hugo — like all his characters for that matter — is true, being the essence of what one sees in reality. It is the type — of which one encounters only individuals. Should you happen to run into an engraver one of these days, like Girardet or Eichens, for example, who make aquatints, you’d be doing me a great favour if you could ask in passing: what is normally used for the drawings intended to serve as a guide for the engraving? Perhaps they’ll say: printer’s ink. If that’s what they use, what do they dilute that printer’s ink with? How do they use it? It seems to me that if you raised this with some engraver or other in passing and told me what he said, I would probably find something in what he said 
   that would throw light on some questions, even if it wasn’t a direct answer to what printer’s ink is mixed with to make it possible to work with it on paper in various ways. No doubt there are other kinds of printer’s ink apart from the one I have at the moment, and the question may resolve itself in due course. Effects like those in aquatint engravings are produced in the drawings when one works with printer’s ink and turpentine, as I tried now. I’ve seen drawings in the past by Mottram, say, the English engraver who engraved the Boughtons, and I wish I knew what he worked with, for example. It goes without saying that I’m not in a rush to have this information, but if you happen to hear something about different methods of drawing, do let me know. I too know Soek’s wife and her mother15 (if she still lives with her) — went there in the past — they’re still very clear in my memory — and find them two sympathetic people — who remind me of the members of my own household — so much so indeed that instinctively I often think of them as members of the same family. They’re just like characters from Souvestre, say, or E. Frère. One sees more people like that in Paris — everywhere for that matter. Such people always remind me of the female figures in the gospel, perhaps because sometimes in their expressions there’s something of, for instance, the figures in Delaroche, Good Friday, or in Landelle, Blessed are they that mourn. I know, this view isn’t complete, there are other aspects — still better than Delaroche — and deeper than he — such as those of Lhermitte and Herkomer. Well, I find that in them too, but I can still understand that this movement became popular in the days of Souvestre, Delaroche, Frère, Landelle &c., even though compared with Millet and others it isn’t entirely correct and true. Is ANKER still alive? I think of his work often, I find it so sound and so delicately felt. He’s one of the genuine old sort, like Brion. Old chap, how I sometimes long for you to be in the studio again. I sincerely hope you’ll get the money back from H. In my case a lot had to be spent right away this time, and I have precious little left. Anyway, write as soon as you can when it’s getting towards the 20th. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, thanks for the enclosure. I read your letter with great interest. I’m glad that you understand correctly from which quarter difficulties will probably come. Namely, that — without meaning to do so — women like S. (you rightly say that they, though, are good in themselves) aren’t very careful about what they say, etc. When, in short, you refer to a relationship between your patient and her own mother, that isn’t something on which I congratulate you. I fear that she’ll be drawn backwards many times by that link when you’re trying to bring about forward movement. But — it’s nothing unusual. It is, however, a sad thought that something like the relationship between mother and daughter can have a dark side. So that a man who loves light and seeks it can be fatally thwarted by it. Through the influence of the mother and mixing with girlfriends — perhaps more than through anything else — something called a retrograde3 gets into women sometimes and prevents reforms in their thinking and actions, which are sometimes needed, and urgently needed. I’m glad that you rightly foresee what may lie in store for you from that quarter, but I’m not glad that you weren’t spared this — if the woman had left her family completely, you could expect fewer problems in the future, I believe. 
   And the difficulty is precisely that it’s impossible to calculate exactly what form the problems will take, and that when taking precautionary measures one must sometimes think: yes, but it may well be that I’ll have to perform diametrically opposite manoeuvres.  Somewhere in a preface by Zola there are the following words, I believe in this form: ‘Yet these women are not bad, the impossibility of living a straight life in the midst of the gossip and calumny of the suburbs is the cause of their faults and their fall’. If the woman is sufficiently cultivated to be able to follow you in thoughts and concepts and thus share in your inner life, that will be a strong bond that will neutralize many problems. The problem to be expected in establishing relations with her family, I would think, is that one sometimes lapses into the official as a result (people take it like that sometimes, most indiscreetly), when one meant it to be more private and unofficial. Act and be silent is not everyone’s aim, and some older and wiser family members lapse so easily into noise-making that one may regret having spoken to them. Especially because they can’t help intriguing, and anyway — they’re probably wolves.
   I wish we weren’t so far apart. I wrote to you yesterday at greater length about some difficulties you may encounter shortly, but I was prevented from writing6 by the sense that I myself sometimes don’t know how to carry on. Moreover, I have faith that where love is true it doesn’t die, at least not when one acts with reason at the same time. Yet I would like to cross that out as well, because it’s not right. For love can indeed die, in a way — but there’s something like a power of renaissance in love.  What man kills God restores to life. Van der Weele came to see me again. Perhaps through him I’ll make the acquaintance of Piet van der Velden, whom you certainly know from his figures of peasants and fishermen.  I met Van der V. once, and he made a good impression on me at the time. I was reminded of the character of Felix Holt the radical by Eliot. There’s something broad and rough in him that pleases me greatly — something like the roughness of torchon. A man who evidently doesn’t seek civilization in outward things but is much further inwardly, much much much further than most people. In short, he’s a true artist, and I’d like to get to know him for I would trust him and I’m sure I would learn from him. And if it doesn’t happen through Van der Weele, it isn’t impossible that I may bump into him at some point.  Rappard was due to visit me last Monday, then his sister10 fell ill, he wrote, and again he couldn’t come. Perhaps he’ll come this week.  Well, at present there are no drawings in which I don’t work in printer’s ink with a brush.  I have to say that I’m running a little short. This is certainly not your fault — but it’s not my fault either. Whatever calculations I make, I can’t economize any further. 
   And to carry out some plans I would need to have more than I can command. I’d get stuck if I began them. But it’s sometimes a sad thing when one thinks, I could do one thing or another this way or that way, and to come up against the costs.  Then there remains undischarged energy in a person that one would prefer not to have to shut up inside oneself. Yet I don’t say this to complain — I’m grateful that I can make progress, albeit not as forcefully as I would like. But the English say sometimes: Time is money, and I can’t help thinking on occasion that it’s hard to see time passing in which this or that could have been done if I’d had the means. You will understand what I mean, I would like to be able to spend more, both on models and on painting materials. Even if I don’t sell a single one of my studies, I still believe they’re worth what they cost in outgoings. The studio is so much better and more practical, but I only have enough steam for ‘half speed’ and want to go ‘full speed’. Again, I don’t say this to complain, nor because I want to press you to make greater sacrifices — you’re already overburdened yourself. But in explanation and to open my heart for once. For you’ll understand that sometimes I’m burdened with cares. Still, we must make shift with what we have, and undermine with patience the things we can’t lift with strength. This week I drew a few recumbent figures, I’ll need figures of corpses or sick people eventually, both men and women. I passed by Israëls’s house lately12 — I’ve never been inside it — the front door stood open because the hall was being scrubbed — I saw things hanging in the hall and do you know what they were? The large Herkomer, Last muster Sunday at Chelsea13 and a photob after that painting by Roll, Miners’ strike, which you may remember I wrote to you about at the time. I didn’t know there was a photoc of Last muster. I have the large woodcut of the two main figures and the first rough sketch, done long before the painting.  Well, adieu old chap, best wishes for your patient, good fortune with work. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I wanted to let you hear a word from me around your birthday. May the year you are beginning be a good one for you, and may you have good fortune at work — and I hope above all that in this year you’ll find some satisfaction in what you’ve done for your patient, and that she may recover and find new life. Do you realize it’s almost a year since you were here? I long so much for you to come. It’s work from that whole year that I must show you — that we must discuss in connection with the future.  Do you think it will be about the same time as last year that you come — or will it be postponed because you think it undesirable, perhaps, to leave your patient alone? Anyway, if you can say anything about your arrival, write to me.  In the past you told me a great deal about the Swedish painters — Heyerdahl — Edelfelt. This week I found a reproduction of a painting by Edelfelt, a divine service on the beach. There’s a touch of Longfellow’s poetry about it. The work is very fine. That’s a movement I’m very fond of and which does more good in the world, I believe, than the Italians and Spaniards with their ‘Cairene armourers’4 and so on, which I find so tedious in the long run.
   This week I worked on a figure of a woman gathering peat on the heath. And a kneeling figure of a man. One must know the structure of figures so well to get expression — at any rate that’s how I see it. Edelfelt is quite beautiful in his expressions — but he too is concerned not only with the facial expressions but with the whole posture of the figures. Do you know who is perhaps the cleverest of all those Swedes? It may be a certain Wilhelm Leibl, a man who is entirely self-taught. I have the reproduction of a painting by him which he suddenly produced, I believe, at the Exhibition in Vienna in ’82. It shows 3 women in a pew: one seated figure of a young woman in a check dress (Tyrol), two kneeling old women in black with headscarves.  Splendid in sentiment and drawn like Memling or Quinten Massys.  Apparently, that painting caused a great stir among artists at the time — I don’t know what’s happened to the man since. I thought it was a lot like Thijs Maris. In England there’s a German of that type but not as clever, Paul de Gassow, who’s a little like Oberländer, whose heads you no doubt remember. Anyway, there are still good people in that Sweden, it seems. I’m again longing for your letter. What I wrote to you in short about women’s relationships with their mothers — in my case I can assure you that 9/10 of the difficulties I had with the woman had their origin there, directly or indirectly. And yet, although their actions are inexpressibly 
   wrong, those mothers aren’t exactly bad. But they know not what they do11 — women around the age of 50 are often somewhat distrusting, and it’s precisely their own craftiness and suspicion that entraps them. If you like, I can give you more particulars sometime. I don’t know whether all women become more serious as the years pass — and then they want to control and correct their daughters, and go about it completely the wrong way. Yet in some cases their system may have some raison d’être, but they shouldn’t make it their principle and assume a priori that men are deceivers and fools, and that from that it follows that women must deceive them and have a monopoly of wisdom. If the mothers’ system is unfortunately applied to a man who’s honest and in good faith, he’s in an unhappy position. It’s one of the things that are so common these days that everyone can call to mind enough of them from his own experience, and we shouldn’t imagine something unusual is happening to us.  Still, we’re not yet in the age when reason (in the sense not only of reason but also of conscience) will be respected by everyone. It’s our duty to work to bring that age about, and one of the first things required by the love of humanity is to take into account the circumstances of present-day society when judging characters.  How beautiful Zola is — it’s L’assommoir above all that I often think of. Tell me — how are you getting on with reading Balzac?  I’ve finished Les misérables. I know that Victor Hugo analyzes in a different way from Balzac and Zola, but he sees through things too. 
   Do you know what I’d prefer to the woman’s relations with her mother? — in my case, where they have decidedly unfortunate consequences — that the mother should move in with me completely. I suggested that once this winter when the mother was very hard pressed, and I said if you’re so attached to each other, come and live together. But it’s just that they, I believe, do not find good enough the simplicity which I want on principle and which is also necessitated by the circumstances, even when they themselves can’t get by on it. Many people pay more attention to the outward appearance of a family than to its inner life, and imagine they do good in that way. Society is full of that, seeming instead of being. Again, these people are not bad because of this, but they are foolish.  However great the difference between the people in question, keep an eye on the relations between your patient and her mother. Don’t think for a moment that I suspect the mother of anything particularly bad — no, but it would surprise me if she doesn’t share in the general foolishness. And your patient the general female tendency to make a mistake when deciding what they’ll be guided by.  In some cases the mother of a woman is the representative of a meddlesome and malicious and insufferable family — and as such definitely harmful and hostile, even if she isn’t that bad in herself. In my case she’d be much better if she was in my house rather than in the houses of the other members of the family — where she’s sometimes brazenly duped by them and incited to intrigue.  Have you ever thought of your patient’s mother in this role, which she may well take on to some degree? So be on the alert. And as for the Soeks, you yourself perhaps foresee that it isn’t certain that they’ll have the same notions of discretion that you and your patient have and that are desirable. In relation to your patient you’ve been absolutely honest and in good faith — that’s the most important thing, you see, and that keeps the future bright, whatever it may be. Yet even when one has acted rightly, one can sometimes face unpleasantness all the same. Anyway, I wish you as little as possible of that in this year that you are beginning today — and, on the contrary, every good wish again. Now, write soon — if you haven’t already done so — which I hope is the case. Adieu, old chap, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Your letter and the enclosure were most welcome, as always. And as always, thank you for them — I appreciate it all the more knowing so well that you yourself have many cares. What you write concerning your patient is to some extent new and to some extent not. That you’ve written home about it, or rather will write, is something that will give you peace and is right. Naturally, I’ve never said a word about the matter, and you can rest assured that I won’t let on at home or elsewhere that I already knew something of it or am aware of more intimate details. And, I imagine, behave as if I first heard about it only recently, on a superficial level. But anyway, it’s unlikely that anyone will speak to me about it. So rest assured on this point. Well, I sincerely hope that everything happens as you have planned towards October, and am glad the time has come, sincerely glad both for you and for her. I think this is for the best — especially because I know details — when one meets each other like that one should never again part. And I sincerely hope that this summer it will be possible for you to come to Holland with her. Who knows if precisely now some things to do with the woman may become clear to me too. And so the Salon has opened. No doubt Messrs H.G.T. and C.M. will be paying you a visit one of these days. It’s now almost a year since I had the unpleasantness with him (i.e. with HGT). I shan’t cross his path again, I believe he realizes that too, and he can rest assured that I hardly ever think of what occurred. It seems to me, should H.G.T. say anything to you about me, that you should cut him off more or less in this manner: Has V. obstructed you since then or bothered you? — given that he hasn’t, you shouldn’t make things difficult for him. 
                       It’s rather disagreeable to me that I always have to avoid the house of G.&C. out of discretion, on account of that difficulty with H.G.T. You know what H.G.T. wrote about me to Pa that time, for example — well, so far he hasn’t retracted his view that I’d made it impossible for him to have anything further to do with me. It goes without saying that as long as he holds that opinion of me I won’t set foot inside the premises on the Plaats. Not, however, that I’m afraid of meeting H.G.T., not because I want to hide from him or anything like that, but because I don’t want to give him offence.  If someone wants to have nothing to do with me, well I’ll help and try to avoid the few places where we might unintentionally bump into each other. Otherwise, don’t contradict such an opinion. From a certain point of view H.G.T. isn’t wrong — nonetheless, things could be viewed from another angle. It could have been taken differently from the way in which His Hon. took it then. But that’s up to him. The reason I’m writing just a word about it is so that, supposing he speaks to you on the subject, you can tell him I no longer think about what happened other than that, to avoid what he might find indiscreet (given his plainly pronounced opinion of me), I refrain from going into the premises on the Plaats and shall continue so to refrain as long as he holds the opinion of me that he expressed to Pa. For my part I gave my opinion of His Hon. to you then, but not as far as I remember to others, influenced by various circumstances that were most disagreeable for me (displeasure with Mauve5 &c.). I freely admit that as a result my judgement of him wasn’t correct either and, on condition that H.G.T. takes back what he wrote about me to Pa (that I had made it impossible for him to have anything further to do with me), I will take back my opinion that H.G.T. was to blame for disagreeable things that happened to me. If I express myself clearly enough, you may find in these thoughts something that could lead to more peace or better mutual understanding, which would be far from a matter of indifference to me.
                       If I count from last May, Theo, this year hasn’t been exactly easy or free of care, eh. But that’s nothing; convenience or being without cares isn’t my ideal and goal either. Still, rather a lot has happened. I find what you send not a little but a lot, yet although it was a lot — more even than you yourself could really go without — the woman and I have the devil’s own job to keep going and to make progress with the work and with housekeeping. Now it’s sometimes very unpleasant for me if relations are so strained that, for example, I must avoid the very people that one ought to meet in connection with the work, directly or indirectly. And I wish it was all cleared up. Anyway, I’ve just about given up responsibility for that. At the moment I have different kinds of work on my hands that I ought to carry through — and truly, I’m rather short. You write about Rappard — it’s so tiresome that he didn’t come when he wrote that he would — if I asked him to advance me something I’m sure he wouldn’t refuse me. For he himself proposed that to me this winter, but then he fell ill and we couldn’t correspond about the matter for which the money was to be intended, namely lithographs and drawings related to them. Then his father wrote, ‘my son is ill but I know about it, if you are hard up I shall advance you the amount in question’. I thought that was so good of R.’s father that I would have found it gross of myself if I had immediately taken it then. And so wrote, ‘no, let your son get better first’. Now R. did get better but I heard no more about it and he was absorbed in other work. And so that’s still pending and there’s always something that gets in the way of pursuing the matter. But I for one did carry on with it, namely drawing with printer’s ink, lithographic crayon, etc., and indeed incurred considerable costs. He isn’t in the least responsible for that, but I just mean that that’s all the more reason why he won’t refuse, I believe, to give me an advance.
                       So I’ll ask him — but am expecting a letter from him and some time will probably pass before I’ve explained the matter and got a reply, for he’s sometimes a lazy correspondent. When the money from you arrived this morning I had no money — that is, had been absolutely without a single cent for about a week. Furthermore, I had run out of drawing materials. I was in discussions with Smulders about a batch of drawing paper and took it, although the expenditure was inconvenient now — but I had to have it and other materials such as the engravers’ printer’s ink and lithographic crayon. And had to pay various things and stock up for the housekeeping. And had to pay models whom I had had in the meantime so that I could carry on working. I’m terribly sorry to have to ask but if it’s at all possible send me another 10 francs, say. A week’s work depends on it, for I shan’t be able to get an immediate answer from Rappard, am already short of cash, and have appointments with models. If Rappard then sends me some, there will again be a phase when everything goes smoothly until there can be a breathing space once more. If you can send some, work will come off the stocks rapidly this week, and otherwise there’ll be nasty damage to the vessel. But forgive me, there was a combination of costs (all unavoidable) that I couldn’t quite cope with. And if you haven’t got it — well — we won’t starve as a result. The difficulties in small matters about small sums are sometimes truly perplexing, and this is such a case. I hope R. will be able to help me a little, for I’m in need of it, just as the field needs a shower when it has long been dry.  Well, again I wish you all good fortune as regards your patient. The weather here is delightful at times; no doubt it’s beautiful where you are too, and will do her good. Adieu. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, You’ll be busy with the Salon1 — I deliberately kept a stamp so that I could write to you again if need be. I’ve written to friend Rappard, but no answer yet of course — in normal circumstances he sometimes waits a month before replying.  If you’re hard pressed, send less than the usual if need be, but send it as soon as possible.
                       I’ve made an appointment with Van der Weele to go painting in the dunes next week. He’s to explain some things I don’t yet know about.  I worked in the dunes these last few days but I long for a model, I can’t get on otherwise. In short, I’m a little worried. So write as soon as possible — apart from that, I’m making fairly good progress with the work, and I believe you would approve of some of the drawings I’m working on. I hope things go your way a bit, old chap — for I understand that things are 
                       difficult for you too. Good fortune with everything — adieu, I must start work — outdoors. Ever yours, Vincent I’ll write to you in more detail about a few things soon. The woman appears to have something that’s connected to what I told you about her mother, it may be nothing, it may be something. I don’t know myself as yet, but I’m worried about this too. Write soon, old chap — for it’s very nasty to be completely broke. And makes small things become malignant sometimes.  My dear Theo, I received your letter in good order with the 50 francs enclosed. Which were a deliverance for me, at any rate a respite. I’ve also heard from friend Rappard — but nothing definite as yet.  A letter that’s a reply to my letter, and that he will help me and come as well, but, he writes, my health is letting me down again. Ends with: I enclose the money herewith. Postscriptum: oh, I’ll come immediately and bring it myself — I’ll come tomorrow. This is followed by a telegram the next day. Not coming, letter follows later.  So, despite having heard something, it’s still the same as with a game of goose, if you remember how one can land on a goose, thus go forward, but unfortunately just then land on a new goose with its beak pointing in a direction one doesn’t want to take, and so one must count back to one’s original position. Yet it isn’t his fault, for he’s been really very ill and is still feeling the remnants or after-effects of that. Moreover, his sister3 had a fairly similar illness, and they were most concerned about her, but she recovered too.  Nonetheless, I do believe this of friend Rappard, that he does things that cost him a great deal of energy and nervous tension and aren’t worth the powder he expends on them. Thus before his illness I heard about decorations for the centenary of the Utrecht painters’ society, and now this time it was church ornaments. By chance 
   I wrote to him that I thought they were both unwise, and he fell ill last time and now this time. I would approve if he overworked himself on normal things, but, as I said, this isn’t worth the powder expended on it, and I wrote again to him: you’re a soldier and one of the few who have cartridges in their box at the present time. Use them only in cases where a shot is unavoidable.  I fear — dear brother — that the money you loaned to our dear cousin H. has currently taken the form of a vicious gun dog, for instance, or some similar curiosity, since I believe he’s quite often mistaken about such purchases — and then later it’s sometimes impossible for him to bring it back from that form to the state of banknotes or to cash it in because, like other lovers of horses and hounds, he’s caught in the snares of some crooked dealer. I’m one of those who wish him as much good fortune as possible in these negotiations, and would like to see nothing better than that their outcome is that he may speedily return what he owes you. At one time there were big plans to populate the plantation5 with countless dogs. This livestock farming is highly commendable, but at present I want to say no more about it than that I hope it may prove exceedingly profitable.
   Is your patient already discharged from hospital? But there may still be worrying days, no less grave than when she was in there. Michelet says rightly: a woman is an illness. They are changeable, Theo — they are changeable like the weather. Now those with an eye for it see something beautiful and good in all weathers, find snow beautiful and burning sun beautiful and storm beautiful and calm beautiful, cold good and heat, are fond of all seasons and don’t want to miss a single day of the year, and are fundamentally content and resigned to things being as they are — yet even if one looks at the weather and the changing year like this — and the changing female nature in the same way — believing that in the essence of that nature, in its mysteriousness, there is a Reason — accepting where one doesn’t understand — even, I say, if one should view it in that way, our own nature and vision isn’t always and at every moment in harmony and accord with that of the woman with whom we’re united, and individually one feels either concern or dissatisfaction or vacillation, despite the belief and the good spirits or serenity one may have.  I was told by the professor who delivered her that the complete cure of my woman would take years. That is, the nervous system remains tremendously sensitive, for example, and she has that changeableness of women very strongly. The great danger is — as you will understand — tumbling back into old mistakes.  This danger, although of a moral nature, has links with the physical constitution. And I have constant and sometimes serious concerns about what I would call these lurches between getting better and lapsing back into old bad habits. Her mood can be such that it’s almost unbearable, even for me, quick-tempered, wilfully wrong, in short, sometimes I despair. It passes — and more than once she has said to me later — I DON’T MYSELF KNOW WHAT I’M DOING THEN.
   Do you remember writing to me last year that you feared that I would be burdened with the mother? Sometimes I wish things had taken that turn. The mother is very sturdy when she wants to be, and could have done so much better than she has. Now she sometimes obstructs more than she helps. Anyway, when the woman does something wrong it’s sometimes the mother’s fault, and when the mother does wrong it’s sometimes the family who are behind the mother. Things which aren’t so bad in themselves but which prevent progress and overwhelm or neutralize better influences.  My woman has certain faults and defects in the way she acts — that’s bound to be the case. THAT DOES NOT MAKE HER BAD in my view. Still, those defects must be eliminated — habits of laxity, indifference, lack of activity and deftness, oh, a mass of things. But all with the same root — wrong upbringing, years of an utterly wrong view of life, fatal influences of bad company. I tell you this in confidence, mind — and not out of desperation but so that you will understand that for me this love isn’t a bed of roses, but something as prosaic as Monday morning.  A small painting by Tissot showed a figure of a woman in the snow amid withered stalks. Way of flowers, way of tears. Well, my woman no longer walks on a way of flowers as she did when she was younger and pleased herself and followed her inclination, but life has become thornier for her and become a Way of tears, especially last year — yet this year has thorns too, and the following years as well — still, by persevering she will overcome them. But sometimes there’s a crisis — particularly when I venture to raise the matter of some fault of hers that I’ve been quietly observing for a long time. For example, just to mention one thing, mending the clothes and making the children’s clothes herself. But that ends with her getting down to it one day, and she’s already much improved in this respect and in other respects. I must change so much in myself too, but I must ensure that in me she has an example of working and of patience, and that’s damned difficult, brother, to be so that one can indirectly show someone how to do something, and I too fall short sometimes, I must raise myself to something better in order to awaken her interest.
   The boy, above all, is doing extremely well, though — the girl was very ill in the past and neglected.  But the little lad is a miracle of high spirits, already appears inclined to oppose social institutions and conventions. For instance, as far as I know all children are brought up on a kind of bread porridge. But he has refused that with the greatest determination. Although as yet without teeth, he bites firmly into a piece of bread and gets down all kinds of eatables while all the time smiling and crowing and making noises, but his mouth stays firmly shut for porridge &c. &c. He often sits with me in the studio on the floor in a corner on a couple of sacks or something, he crows at the drawings and is always quiet in the studio because he looks at the things on the wall. Oh, he’s such an agreeable little lad. The number of studies keeps growing — when you come I think you’ll find some to put in a portfolio in your room perhaps, anyway that’s up to you, as long as you clearly understand that you may of course regard anything you take a liking to as your own. Other things must come forth from the studies, though, and better studies come from the old ones. I myself don’t know exactly how.  But I do long for you to see them again.  I saw with great interest a publication, Le Salon 1883, a first issue of a series of illustrations, some deuced good. Done with that new way of reproduction. I’ve subscribed to it, although I have enough expenses, with a view to what I’m doing myself at present with the printer’s ink and lithographic crayon. Listen, I definitely believe that some of my things would do well if reproduced in that way — particularly those that have the more intense blacks obtained by lithographic crayon and printer’s ink; I can also get the brownish wash that I often come across in the above prints. Well, when you come perhaps we can arrange one thing and another. 
   And perhaps I’ll write down a detailed statement of several matters about which I need information, and you could take some of my studies together with that to show to Buhot, for instance, who would then probably shed light on a few things for me. Recently read Un mâle by Camille Lemonnier — very strongly done in the manner of Zola. Everything observed from nature and everything analyzed.  Saw a big Fromentin, a battle of fellahs, in the window at G&C.  Also saw the nouveautés, perhaps not all of them. I again came across Julien Dupré, whom I wrote to you about, in two things that I found less beautiful and more conventional than what I saw by him in an illustrated magazine in the winter. Did you already know that Rappard’s painting has been accepted this time in Amsterdam? Well, it’s late already — thanks for your timely dispatch — I just hope that R’s ‘letter follows’ doesn’t take too long, or that H. v. G.’s livestock farming may prosper.  Adieu — good fortune in all things, especially the woman. Ever yours, Vincent Still, Fromentin is clever — and a seeker, and someone who carries through, and conscientious too. My dear Theo, I wanted to let you know in just a word or two that Rappard has been to see me and that I’ve borrowed 25 guilders from him, with the promise of repayment in the autumn. I was delighted by his visit — he came in the morning and stayed until the last train in the evening, and we spent the whole day looking at one thing and another, and he did a sketch using printer’s ink and turpentine to try it out. Now I’m going to him tomorrow to see his work and his studio. It was a truly enjoyable day — he was rather changed in both  his appearance and his manner — for my part I find him much better like this than before. He’s broader in the shoulders, and in his views on many matters as well, I believe.  Well, the money from him has helped me to get many things I needed; it was badly needed.  I used it, among other things, to have large sketchpads made for outdoors.
   I had to keep back some money for a pair of trousers, though, and tomorrow there’s the cost of travelling to Utrecht. But it still helps.  In addition, I was surprised by a very brief visit from Pa. Neither he nor I mentioned your news about the woman. Pa probably thought I didn’t know yet, and I kept to our agreement.  I think Pa was rather taken by the figures of workmen I’m working on.  Among the pads I’d made with the money from R. there’s one for watercolours too. I tried it out straightaway, a hut in the dunes with a wheelbarrow &c. in the foreground, a figure of a digger in the background. Ah, Theo. I’ll get the hang of watercolour one day or another.
   In the last few days, or rather weeks, I’ve had the very pleasant company outdoors of a young surveyor3 who was trying his hand at drawing. He showed me drawings which I thought poor, and I told him why I thought they were poor. After that I naturally expected to hear no more from him — but one fine day he approached me again, he had time now and might he come with me outdoors? Well, Theo, that chap has got the hang of landscape drawing so well that these days he brings along truly attractive sketches of meadows and woods and dunes. He has to take an examination in October, however, and his father4 doesn’t want him to spend so much time on it. But in my view he can easily combine his profession of surveyor with drawing.  He’s the same sort of young chap as Rappard when we first met him. What he did before I knew him were horribly botched paintings, generally atrocious. I began by telling him that first he should only draw for a while — I had to make him draw lots of things, which he didn’t enjoy but he trusted me in that. Well, this morning he asked if he might have another go at painting, and that went extremely well now
   and he has scraped off all his old things.  Am longing for a letter from you. Rappard sends his regards. Are things going well for you, and for your patient? Pa did say that you’d written to them about coming this summer. I can hardly tell you how I long for that.  Saw The harvest by Lhermitte in the Salon illustrated catalogue. It looks beautiful; how it captures the truth of the work and of the peasant figure.  Well, adieu, I hope your letter comes soon for I have need of it again. I saw Arnold in town with someone else, perhaps Tripp6 — they were walking with Mauve. But saw them in the far distance. Because Mauve was in the middle I thought of Christ between two thieves, or else the group, in dark silhouette against a sunlit wall, looked like someone being taken in by two gendarmes. Anyway, those are figments of one’s imagination, things as they might be seen. I wish you well, old chap, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve just got back from Utrecht after visiting Rappard, and happily I found your letter. Thanks for the letter and for the enclosure. Am glad you’re enjoying yourself these days. Le Paradou — must have been real. Yes, I would have nothing against giving something like that a try sometime. And you would be good models, I don’t doubt that. But I would still prefer to see diggers, and find it more beautiful outside Paradise, namely where one thinks more of the severer ‘in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread’.  But I think the one is made more beautiful precisely through being opposed to the other. I see from your letter that you were a little concerned about what I wrote regarding the woman3 — it has remedied itself once again, and there will come a time, I hope, when everything goes a great deal better. When you come, I’ll be able to tell you better than I can in writing what I’m sometimes worried about. I repeat, my woman’s true and thorough recovery in both mind and body will take years. 
   So you needn’t be immediately concerned that there’s something unusual if I write to you that I’m a little worried about it. That’s unavoidable. But, in particular, don’t talk about it to others. In general she’s getting on very well and making progress, but at times I’m worried, although I don’t find anything unusual in what has befallen me. Anyway, we’ll talk it over sometime. Above all, don’t think badly of her — there are deuced good things in her character that are still well worth the trouble when things are going well.  Now, as to my visit to Rappard — I’m very glad I went. We’ll visit each other in turn more often now. I found one painting by him, a woman spinning, and above all the large sketch for it, the same size, highly serious and truly sympathetic.  Also charcoal drawings — one of a ward in an institute for the blind, one of a sort of forge, with imposing figures — very good.  A second painting of tile painters was in Amsterdam, but saw the studies for it and sketches.
   My impression was also borne out as regards certain changes for the good in his way of thinking.  I have hope we’ll become better friends from year to year, and be more and more help to each other with work. He had a small watercolour of a village churchyard which I found outstanding in sentiment, highly original.  If you know the Belgian painter Meunier — some things in his work reminded me of him. Well, during these reciprocal visits we talked a great deal about new and further plans. I’m seriously considering making a start on a few large charcoal drawings with figures.  But Theo, the work involves many outgoings, and in many respects I don’t have the freedom of movement I consider advisable. Of course I have to spend something on housekeeping too, don’t I? After all one needs food and clothing, and the studio costs rent too. But still. My spirits were raised because Rappard took pleasure, for instance, in several things I’d done, and particularly now that I’ve seen what his own work is like I’m all the more glad that he found some of my things sympathetic. 
   My fear always is not working enough, I believe I can make it so much more beautiful, and I hunt for that with a certain fury sometimes. And in Rappard I see again how one benefits from using good stuff, taking lots of models, &c. R.’s studio is very good and looks pleasant. I would like you to bring my old studies when you come. I believe that with everything all together you could make a different choice, and when you come I would like us to pick out what you might like to have in such a way that it forms a kind of whole. I don’t know myself to what extent some studies are sufficiently finished to be suitable for being kept somewhere other than in my studio. Anyway, I’ve come back from Rappard full of plans and full of hope, precisely because with him I already see the fruits of the studies, namely combinations of several figures in more important compositions. That awaits me too. But that takes time, and meanwhile one must keep on doing new studies after the model. Then good things precipitate out. The best thing about our whole arrangement is that the studies stay together, either with you or with me — let us keep our spirits up and toil on. Early tomorrow morning I’m going out with Van der Weele. Adieu, old chap, thanks again and best wishes. Would your woman like some drawings? Perhaps I can find something for her one of these days. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, This week I’ve been busy working on a large drawing, a scratch of which I’m sending. When I talked to Rappard, he said ‘those very first drawings of yours were good after all, you should do something in that genre again’.  Do you remember that in the very beginning I once sent you sketches of a sort, ‘Winter Tale’, Shadows passing, etc.? You said at the time that you thought the action of the figures was insufficiently expressed — do you remember? Now that was entirely true, but for a few years now I’ve been toiling solely on the figure in order to get some action and also some structure into it. And precisely because of that toil, I had rather lost my enthusiasm for composing and for making my imagination work once more.  It was reawakened when Rappard talked about those early days with a certain warmth. Now, however superficial this little sketch may be, I believe you’ll find something of the earliest time in it, but just with more action.  This is Peat diggers in the dunes — the drawing itself is now about 1 metre by 1/2 metre.  It’s a wonderfully beautiful sight in nature, from which an infinite number of subjects can be taken. I went there often these last few weeks and have all kinds of studies of it. Rappard saw studies of it, but when he was here we didn’t know how to bring it together. This composition came about later. And once I’d finally got it all just about together, it went quite smoothly, and at 4 o’clock in the morning I was already working on it in the attic.
   Now that I’ve begun composing again, my plan is to execute more things which I have in my mind and for which I already have studies.  And have made arrangements for that by having stretching frames &c. made, and also a big wooden frame so that I can work in the frame and enclose the drawing. I believe you may not be opposed to taking this one when it’s finished to show to the people at the illustrated magazines. And will take greater pleasure from something like this than from separate studies. I don’t know in advance, though, and we can see when you come.  But, old chap, I’m glad that I’ve been able to start work on this before you come, and we’ll be better able to talk about the future. I feel such a need to make something pleasing, something that makes one think. You know that one of the paintings I think the finest of all in existence is The walk on the ramparts by Leys.
   It isn’t that movement, though, that’s the order of the day at present, but the sentiment in it is something eternal, and one can conceive reality, nature, in different ways, and even now recognize what was perhaps sought and felt more generally in Leys’s time than it is today.  But it takes constant study to express what one feels and to capture the form. I can’t tell you how much it raised my spirits to see Rappard again, I think his work is really so good, and when I was at his place he also told me that it had refreshed him to visit me. Through talking to each other we’ve got new ideas. I would like you to see Rappard again when you’re here in Holland. Both in his studio and mine I believe you would get an impression based more on what one saw in the studios in the past than on what there is at present. Yet I believe it would still be in your spirit. At the moment Rappard has a sort of forge, and this winter he did the institute for the blind6 and the tile painters. They all have style, and are pleasing and solid, it seems to me.
   You’ll understand that, what with one thing and another, I’ve had quite a few outgoings. If I hadn’t had the money from R., I wouldn’t have been able to undertake this. And although I have studies for it, I need models continually for this and for others, and progress depends on whether I have the money to take them. I have a few others in my mind, but I’m beginning to run short again. As you see, when I have a windfall, I make use of it to do something that would otherwise miscarry. So if at all possible, send something extra as well.  This, namely the peat diggers, is a different kind of landscape from ‘le paradou’. And please believe that I also feel something for le paradou. Who knows, one fine day I might just tackle such a paradou. Write soon if you haven’t written already. When you see the drawing, I don’t think you’ll think it too big. The proportions the figures acquire in this way are such that one can do them with some force, and they demand to be studied separately. I have studies for all the figures in it. I did this drawing in charcoal and natural chalk and printer’s ink. Well, I wish you well and write soon. I went into the dunes with Van der Weele recently. There we found a place where the dunes are being levelled for sand, a fine sight with fellows and wheelbarrows.  Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
    My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and thanks for the enclosure. Today is Sunday, and this week I’ve worked furiously and am taking today off to be able to write quietly to you, at somewhat greater length than has been possible recently, because many things distracted me. And my need to write is all the greater because I see from your letter that not everything is going well for you, and I wanted to write rather more warmly than normal.  If in my own case — with my limited income — Pa and Ma objected to marriage because of the lack of money, I could more or less accept that, and at least understand their speaking like that and make allowances. But now that they’re raising this same objection in your case, Theo, you who have a permanent position and a good income (more substantial than their own, mark you), I find that unspeakably pretentious and utterly wicked. Ministers are in fact among the wickedest people in society, and barren materialists. Not in the pulpit so much, but in private matters. From a moral standpoint one might perhaps be entitled to object to marriage in certain cases where destitution in the absolute sense is to be expected, but in my view this objection is at once completely invalid morally as soon as there’s no question of destitution in the literal sense. And in your case it would be ridiculous to expect immediate destitution.  Suppose someone like old Mr Goupil1 had an objection concerning money — one expects no less from his standpoint, that of a rich dealer. But with Pa and Ma, who are supposed to be humble and content with simplicity, I think it very nasty of them to speak like that, and I’m ashamed, as it were, that they’re like that. I wish everybody in our house would seek peace and stint themselves rather than chase after a high position. And put our energy into improving ourselves in cultivation of the mind and humanity while being content with the simplest of things on principle.  So it grieves and offends me, it again disappoints me terribly, that Pa and Ma said that.  I would do I don’t know what if I could get this undone somehow. I’d like to be proud of Pa because he was a truly poor village pastor in the pure sense of the gospel, but I find it so wretched when Pa stoops to things that aren’t in keeping with ‘the dignity of his calling’.
   I think Pa might rightly be expected to cooperate where it’s a matter of saving a poor woman on her own — to take her side precisely because she was poor and alone.  Not to do this is a great fault in Pa, and it’s inhuman of whoever does this, and doubly inhuman if a minister does it.  And to stand in the way of such a woman, to obstruct her rescue and salvation, is monstrous.  Now I know full well that almost every minister would say the same as Pa — and that’s why I for one count that entire corps among the wickedest people there are in society. You and I likewise, we occasionally do something that’s perhaps a sin, but after all we’re not merciless and we do feel compassion, and precisely because we don’t consider ourselves to be without fault and know how these things work, we don’t scold fallen or weak women as the ministers do, as if it were all their own fault.  And, moreover, your woman is a decent woman from a respectable family, and really Pa is greatly at fault, I think.  Suppose there were difficulties, it seems to me that Pa, especially as a pastor, ought to urge you to help her and to bear the difficulties for the sake of saving her. With someone like Pa one ought to be able to find comfort where society offers no comfort — but oh yes — they make it worse than ordinary people.  It’s atrocious that Pa adopts this attitude.  When Pa was here he spoke disapprovingly about my being with the woman. I said then that I didn’t refuse to marry her.  Then Pa AVOIDED that and talked around the subject.  He didn’t want to come out with it and say that I should abandon her, but regretted that I had relations with her.  I’ve hardly talked this over with Pa at all, as a matter of fact, precisely because I fail to see that he’s exactly the person who has anything to do with this. You’ve fulfilled your duty to inform Pa and Ma, but now that they talk like this they give you the right, it seems to me, to exclude them from further confidences and to consult them less than you would if they were more reasonable. They’re mistaken in the sense that they’re not humble and humane enough in this case.
   Well, you say that business isn’t flourishing. That’s bad enough. But the situation has always been precarious and always will be in life. Let’s keep our spirits up and seek energy and serenity.  I can inform you that my first composition, of which I sent you a croquis, has progressed to a level where it’s nearly finished. I did the drawing in charcoal first, then I worked it over with the brush and printer’s ink. So there’s quite some force in it, and I believe that the second time one looks at it one will be able to find more than one saw the first time.  And a second drawing of a similar scene was made since I sent you a croquis. Do you remember describing to me some time ago (last year) an accident in a quarry on the Butte Montmartre where you saw a band of workmen and one had injured himself in the quarry?  Well, it’s a similar scene, but just the team of workmen labouring.  I was in Dekkersduin with Van der Weele and there we came across the sand quarry, and I’ve been there since and had plenty of models day in, day out, and so the second is now done too.  They are fellows with wheelbarrows and diggers. I’ll see that I do a croquis of them as well, but it’s a complicated composition and perhaps it may be hard to see both the one and the other in a croquis.  The figures are drawn from extensive studies. I would very much like them to be reproduced. The first is on grey paper, the other on yellow.  I long greatly, Theo, for you to be in the studio once more, for there are so many studies too and you can now see what my aim is when I do the studies, and many more things could be taken from them.
   I’ve had a frame, or rather passe-partout, made of ordinary wood and given it the colour of walnut with a black inside edge, and that encloses the drawing well and one can work comfortably in the frame. I’ve arranged everything in readiness for larger compositions and again have strainers for two new ones. I want to do the tree-felling in the woods sometime, and the rubbish dump with the rag-pickers and the potato-digging in the dunes.  It’s good that I went to Rappard, for his sympathy raised my spirits when I hadn’t enough self-confidence.  But when you see these drawings, Theo, and see the studies, you’ll understand that this year I’ve had as much care and trouble as I can bear. It’s maddeningly difficult to forge the figure.  And really, it’s the same as with iron — one works on a model and carries on working on it, it’s difficult in the beginning but eventually it becomes more pliant, and one finds the figure just as iron becomes malleable when it’s red-hot and then one must keep going at it. So I’ve had models continually for these two drawings, and toiled away early and late.  It’s disappointing that you write that business isn’t going very well — if the position gets more precarious, let’s redouble our efforts.  I’ll be doubly attentive to my drawings, but for the time being you be doubly attentive to sending the money. For me it represents model, studio, bread; reducing it would lead to something like suffocating or drowning, I mean I can no more do without it now than I can do without air. I’ve had these two drawings in my heart for a long time already, but I didn’t have the money to do them and now, through that from Rappard, progress has been made. The creative power can’t be held back, what one feels must come out.
   Do you know what I often consider? It’s to establish relations in England with The Graphic or London News. Now that I’m making progress, I want so very much to carry on working on some larger compositions suitable for an illustrated magazine. Boughton and Abbey are together doing drawings of ‘picturesque Holland’ for Harper of New York (also the agent for The Graphic). I saw these illustrations (very finished although they’re small, definitely done after larger drawings) at Rappard’s. Now I think to myself that if The Graphic and Harper send their draughtsmen to Holland, they wouldn’t be unwilling to take on a Dutch draughtsman if he could supply them with something good for not too much money. I’d like to work towards being permanently employed for a monthly wage rather than selling a drawing now and again for a relatively higher sum. And commit myself to a series of compositions following on, for example, from these two that are on the easel or from others that I’ll add. I would think it advisable to go to London myself with studies and drawings and to look up the managers of the various organizations, or preferably the draughtsmen Herkomer, Green, Boughton (some, however, are in America at present) or others, if they’re in London. And would be able to get information about processes better there than elsewhere. Who knows, perhaps Rappard would also like to come along and bring drawings as well? Something like that needs to be done, I believe, with or without changes to the plan. I would dare, I believe, to undertake to supply about 1 large drawing each month for a double-page engraving,a and shall apply myself to the other formats too, the whole page and the half page.b I know that they can reproduce large and small, but the double page lends itself better to what is done broadly; the smaller can be drawn in other ways, say, with pen and pencil.
   Now I believe that it isn’t every day that the managers of illustrated magazines find someone who regards those magazines as his special goal.  From the small sketch that I’ve made just this minute (in a quarter of an hour and enclosed herewith) of the large drawing, you can see that, if it’s a matter of making the format smaller or bigger, I’m not daunted by that. If I know definitely that this or that is required in a certain size, I can do that.  But for my own study I prefer to work in a somewhat larger size, so that I can study the hands, feet, head in more detail.  Don’t you agree that a host of scenes of tree-felling &c. could be done in the same style in which I’ve handled Peat diggers and Sand workers which it seems to me would have enough vitality done like that to serve as illustrations?  But once again, as long as I don’t find employment the money from you is absolutely indispensable. What I received from you today — I immediately have to pay out exactly as much as I receive, I still have to pay three models whom I had several times, I have to pay the carpenter, pay rent, still pay the baker and grocer and the cobbler as well, and stock up again. Well, in front of me I have two blank sheets for new compositions and must set to work on them. I ought to take a model again, day in, day out, and struggle until I’ve got it down. I’m starting work on it nonetheless, but in a few days, you understand, I’ll be absolutely broke, and then those terrible 8 long days of not being able to carry on and waiting, waiting until it’s the tenth again.  Yes, old chap, if only we could find someone who would take the drawings.  For me work is an absolute necessity, indeed I can’t really drag it out, 
   I take no more pleasure in anything than in work, that’s to say, pleasure in other things stops immediately and I become melancholy if I can’t get on with the work. Then I feel like a weaver when he sees his threads getting tangled and the pattern that he had on the loom going to the devil and his thought and effort coming to nothing. So try to handle it so that we can persevere energetically. I’m going to ask for permission to work in the old people’s home. I already have many studies of orphan men, but I need to have the women too, and also the setting at the place itself. Well, you have your woman to look after, so you know well enough that I don’t have it easy from that angle either, with two more little ones on top.  Tell me, Pa and Ma’s answer won’t affect whether you come this summer, will it?  It’s so essential, I believe, that you see the studies and the large drawings, especially with a view to the financial side as well. You could take the same steps in Paris as I would take in London as regards the people at the illustrated magazines, I believe, if you could show them a couple of large drawings.  But in this case I think it would be wise not to begin before we’re as good as certain that they’ll readily accept it.  These larger compositions entail many outgoings if one treats them conscientiously. For, old chap, it all has to be done with models; even if one uses studies, one still has to retouch with the model there again. If I could take a model more often, I could do them far, far better. So, old chap, as for my not needing you one time, I need it more than ever, but I would point out the opportunity we have if we persevere. Because of the money from Rappard, I already have several things such as sketchbooks &c., and everything you send is converted into drawings, and I believe you’ll find what I’m working on now more suitable than the previous ones. So let’s be of good heart and energetic.
   One obstacle to several things that I have in my head from the beach is that I don’t have a Scheveningen woman’s costume. You understand that I could do that kind of composition with Scheveningen figures in the spirit of the enclosed croquis. But if I draw a figure outdoors it is of course too superficial. It has to be taken up again and worked over with a model, and one needs the costumes. Well, that would be an expense which, if I could afford it, would make three, four drawings I have in my head smooth going. Yet how can I afford it? As I say, in three days everything I have now will be gone, because almost all of it has to be paid out immediately. For these two drawings I also needed various smocks, trousers, sou’wester &c. A model doesn’t always have on a fine smock that’s picturesque — one changes that and it becomes more real and more expressive. When you come you must see how those studies for the figures in the foreground of the croquis are solidly worked. I did them outdoors on a pile of sand near a florist.  In the beginning of your letter you write that you’re pleased that there’s no reason to be concerned about the woman. Well, there isn’t immediately, inasmuch as I try to preserve my serenity and good spirits in that respect too. But I do have cares, heavy cares even, and there’s no lack of difficulties. I began trying to save the woman despite the difficulties, and have persevered up till now despite the difficulties, but it won’t all be rosy in the future either. Still, we must work as hard as we can. Theo, the difficulties I was having with the woman when I last wrote to you — do you know what that was? Her family were trying to get her away from me. I’ve never involved myself with anyone except the mother, because I considered them untrustworthy. The more I try to analyze the history of that family, the more I’m strengthened in that view. Well, they were intriguing precisely because I ignored them, and this led to a treacherous attack. I’ve told the woman how I view their intentions and also that she must choose between her family and me, but that I didn’t wish to have any dealings with any of them, in the first place because I believed relations with her family would lead her back to her previous wrong life. The family’s proposal was that she and her mother should keep house for a brother of hers13 who is separated from his wife and is a notoriously bad lot. The reason why the family advised her to leave me was that I earned too little and I wasn’t good for her, and only did it for the posing but would leave her in the lurch. Mark you, because of the small child she hasn’t done much posing for me this whole year, has she? Anyway, I leave it to you to decide to what extent these suspicions about me were well founded. Well then, but it was secretly discussed behind my back, and in the end the woman told me. I said to her, do what you like but I shan’t abandon you unless you go back to your previous life. The wretched thing is, Theo, that if we’re poor at some point, they try to upset the woman in this way, and that bad lot of a brother, for instance, tries to get her back to the old life. Now — I say only this of her — I would think it brave and generous of her if she broke off all relations with her family, I myself advise her not to go there, but if she wants to go I let her. And the temptation to show off her child, say, often brings her back to her family. And that influence is fatal and has a grip on her precisely because it comes from her family and those who unsettle her by saying ‘he’ll leave you in the lurch’. In this way they seek to persuade her to leave me in the lurch. Adieu, old chap, let’s work and keep a clear head and try to act rightly. You know how things are with my money, help me if you can. Vincent 
    My dear Theo, Something occurred to me that I should add regarding ‘like a tame dove’1 (a period that’s like what Correggio painted);2 it’s that this doesn’t last. And it’s a good thing that it doesn’t. It’s good, too, that we’re able to see and experience it and not forget it. But it doesn’t last, in the sense that this distress (even though it may, as I believe, exist permanently ((yet hidden)) deep within man) is replaced by a more normal state of affairs. Thus, for example, my woman now seems much more like a brood hen, for example, scratching about with the chicks. A brood hen is a nice bird too, all the same. This morning I was in an almshouse, old chap, to see an old woman (with whom I had to negotiate about posing), and up to now she has brought up the two illegitimate children of her daughter, who is a so-called kept woman. Several things struck me — first of all how neglected the poor lambs were — although the granny does her best and there are many far worse — I was also deeply struck by the granny’s loyalty, and it struck me that if an old woman reaches out her wrinkled hands in such a case, we men cannot hold back ours. I saw the true mother, who came to have a look in slovenly, worn-out clothes with tangled hair left undone. And, old chap, I thought that after all there’s a difference between the woman with whom I live as she is now and as she was a year ago when I found her. And between the children there and here. Oh, if only one keeps one’s eye on reality, then it’s as clear as daylight that it’s a good thing to take care of what would otherwise wither and shrivel. And I consider that no argument about the difficulties or the unsuitability of becoming involved holds water, given the reality of these cases.
   And as for me, precisely because it can fit in with my work, many problems disappear on the one hand, although on the other, namely the financial side, there certainly are many difficulties, and these will remain. Yet here too it’s sometimes so that the poor can be the poor one’s friend, and it certainly has a very good side in that both woman and children learn to be thrifty and the man learns to work hard.  But as for you, I foresee that there will be things you’ll have to battle like everyone else, and which are different in nature, and occur in every life for that matter. This means that you’ll have to prepare yourself properly for the fact that you’ll gradually come to see things in the woman you’re looking after that are very different from what you see now, that’s to say in her character. And in short, to speak plainly, you’ll be disappointed in her and perhaps say to her, ‘how changed you are’ — and she’ll say the same to you. And in my view that’s a step forwards if on both sides, despite that mutual ‘change’, you have not become irritated with each other and if you have learned to put up with things from her and she has learned to put up with things from you, or in other words you have both let some things go.  You see this is a crisis no one can avoid, and a crisis through which some become more strongly attached to each other and, on the other hand, many also become separated, which is always most lamentable after one has once started. In short, persevering isn’t always easy.
   And here in my case, for instance, on occasion during those days I was especially glad that there were children, so that the path of duty could be more clearly discerned, both for the woman and for me.  You see, a person has no better friend than his duty and, although he’s sometimes a rough and hard master, as long as one works for him one won’t easily go bankrupt. And if I foresee that you’ll have strife, perhaps more than the ordinary average amount, I base this assumption on the fact that this woman also probably comes from what might be called a lower class. And what Pa, for instance, says on that subject — you know his way of thinking too well for there to be any need for me to repeat it — it’s indeed true, at least in many respects, I admit that. Yet there are cases like yours now where there’s a life to be kept above water and then — you see, then Pa himself wouldn’t know what to do, or rather I believe that then his heart too would in fact decide it, ‘I AM FOR LIFE’. Ah! You see, when I sometimes have doubts I ask myself: would you like to be a judge passing a death sentence? And always, always I have only one answer: No, once and for all I am for the abolition of statutory and other death sentences, anathemas and other capital punishments. We’re called upon to preserve life, to respect it, and that is our duty, and we can always justify that even if the world says we’re wrong or even if it doesn’t bring us good fortune.
   So, old chap, this letter is to tell you that you have my sympathy, not only if it turns out well but also should it turn out badly.  And as for me, you needn’t conclude from this letter that it turned out badly in my case. For I have many, many reasons to be thankful. But nonetheless, I too suffered petty vexations5 of various kinds, and the ‘precarious’ nature of such matters has become so evident to me that I wanted to give you my opinion once and for all, while you’re at the beginning, that I think it good that someone tries to save the life of a woman like that who isn’t known to him, even though he doesn’t know in advance how the woman will turn out later or what she’ll prove to be like. And so in any case won’t belong to those who say, ‘you should never have started’, for it goes without saying that this will be the general opinion if, unfortunately, it should not turn out well.  At the same time this letter is also to add that I consider it desirable that there be a child. For there, too, you’ll see that most people consider that a problem, which I do not, the opposite in fact. And I believe everything can be so arranged that you don’t compromise yourself in the eyes of the world. But suppose things turned out so that you had to choose between compromising yourself and abandoning her, then I would approve of you if you said: I am for her life, and in order to save a human life I scorn compromise. This for an extreme situation, and as long as you can remain at peace with everyone without damaging her, do so. Anyway, it isn’t superfluous to say this when one takes into account that, for example, Pa once said to me, ‘There’s something immoral in a relationship with a woman of a lower class’ (I don’t think this is true, since I see no connection between class and morality. Class is a matter for the world, morality is a matter for God). Also: ‘Don’t sacrifice your position for a woman.’ Which in my view no longer applies when a human life is at stake. Yet Pa himself is far from obstinate, and is often very reasonable.
   As to whether you’ll have some people against you because of the woman, I believe that it’s a thing not to be repented of6 to aim for a permanent relationship, in contrast to many who in principle only enter into relationships with no obligations.  With a permanent relationship one finds great inner calm and is in harmony with nature in my view, whereas one goes against the eternal moral laws if one tries to evade the consequences of a relationship with a woman. And so, in my view, he who orders his life in harmony with the eternal laws of nature and of morality contributes to reform and progress, and consequently to the restoration of things that are disorientated in contemporary society. So don’t doubt the reasonableness of your act, and you can’t be too calm and cool in the face of cynical remarks by people. A permanent relationship is often a source of renewed energy and capacity for work. One loses patronage but gains in capacity for work, and holds one’s own in the end. But do you know what is a danger that I now understand better than in the past? You have to deal not only with yourself as regards your attitude to things, but also with the attitude of the woman you’re with. And while you’re firm and unfaltering in the face of outside influences, it may be that in some cases the woman is upset by some people’s opposition. And is herself opposed, like those people, and says, it isn’t working anyway, it’s impossible, and just when victory was in sight, so to speak.
   In short, because of the shocks that she encounters with you and must withstand, the woman can change greatly: she can turn out good or bad depending on how she takes things, gain or lose in character as a result of rowing against the current.  Well, it lies in a woman’s nature to regress.  Yet because your woman is likely to prove to have an intellectual side and isn’t uncultured, I believe that for that reason she deserves to be doubly trusted. If she adds contentment to intellectual development and is modest in her needs, then I see no reason to fear the above. And equipped for a period of rowing against the current, she can only gain in energy.  So, take heart. And as to the financial side relating to me, be assured that everything you can possibly spare is as absolutely necessary to me as air, and my productivity depends on it.  But provided that I can continue to be active and make progress with what I’m working on in the studio, I believe you needn’t scruple to take some 
   steps to recommend my work, for we shan’t fail to find friends for it — I believe I can assure you of this. And for my part, to lighten your burden, I wrote to C.M. (although I took no pleasure in that, I assure you) and wanted to ask you, could you perhaps write a word to Tersteeg telling him that I’m working on those large drawings. You see, old chap, if Mauve, say, was to come around now, perhaps, perhaps paintings might be made of them. The studies and composition are sufficiently worked up, I believe, to serve as the basis for a painting if need be. If I had the means, for myself I wouldn’t wish to get rid of them, and would keep my work together until it formed a fine whole.  And be assured that I long deeply for your coming. I believe that you’ll see, brother, that something has come of your loyalty and your sacrifice for me after all, and that still more will come. But I’m rather short of money for the outgoings.
   And even if we don’t sell these, I think it could be a way of finding new contacts and perhaps of putting things right with C.M. or Tersteeg, say, or Mauve. Adieu, old chap, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   It would be all the more desirable if you could send me something extra because I would like to do more rather than less in the coming days, in the time still to pass between now and your arrival.  I have hopes of making good progress because I’m getting some results with the lithographic crayon &c. that are stronger and better than the earlier drawings. Just a little further and I believe they’ll be able and willing to use me for illustration work of one kind or another. For, although this is seemingly humble, I’m made for such a position, I feel attracted by it and filled with strength.  And I’d have great pleasure in washing once more on torchon as well, probably before you come. For you mustn’t think that I’ve put watercolour or painting out of my mind. I certainly have it in mind, but drawing is the root of everything, and the time spent on that is actually all profit.  One can’t help having ‘visions of the future’. Even if one is convinced that nothing can be foreseen with certainty or sufficient accuracy. Yet what you wrote to me today could have a great influence on my future.  For who knows if it mightn’t end up with our being nearer each other?
 0  Anyway, this has made your arrival twice as important to me, and I’ll try to give myself a few tugs forwards, and help me with that if you can.  If you had a more domestic life, I believe we’d understand each other even better, and it seems to me we’d be even more help to each other.  And I understand you will probably have cares, and if there’s anything I can do to make my work better so that we can do something with it, I’ll redouble my efforts.  Love is sometimes blessed, although the world seems to believe it should doubt this. But the blessing lies in the fact that one can do more by working with love than otherwise, and one fears less. Thus in the end can have more serenity. In short, one learns to grit one’s teeth. And whatever may be the case — whether it’s an advantage or a disadvantage socially — old chap, I believe that in the end you can only gain from it. So a blessing on what you do, and be assured that my warmest wish is for the woman you’re caring for to recover and be saved.  Yes, it’s an inspiring task — keeping a life above water! Perhaps it’s a great piece of luck both for you and for her at the same time. For hidden powers of energy and life develop then. Thanks once more for your letter and for what you sent. And write again soon, if you can.  My dear Theo, Wanted to tell you that Van der Weele saw my drawings this evening, his opinion was favourable and this gives me great pleasure. Do you know what I’ve done? Given the desirability of making some money if possible, I’ve sent small sketches of the two compositions1 to C.M. My hope is that this will perhaps result in his being ready to help carry out the whole of the plan I have, namely to do a series of drawings of work in the dunes.  I also thought that these drawings might perhaps be something for Cottier. I imagine they’d lend themselves to being placed, as one sometimes sees in England (and elsewhere too), in the panels of a large cabinet, above a fireplace, in panelling, in short in woodwork. But you know how it is with Cottier: if there’s a certain degree of style in a drawing, he’ll be enthusiastic all right, but alas he usually pays little.
   Still, he’s one of those who might give warm support, I believe, and moreover could provide a good place for the drawings. My idea is: could you show the croquis to friend Wisselingh sometime, and mention to him that I think they’d be good for setting in woodwork? Encourage him in any event to come to the studio if he’s ever in town. For supposing he thought they were suitable for this purpose, it might be possible to come to an arrangement with him for more, and if I knew he was interested I could perhaps make them even more suitable for that use if I worked specially at giving them a decorative character. This morning I was out of doors at 4 o’clock already. My plan is to tackle the rag-pickers, or rather I’ve already begun tackling it. For this drawing4 I must do studies of horses, and today I did two in the Rijnspoor stable, and will probably get an old horse at the rubbish dump.
   The scene at the dung-heap is splendid but very complicated and difficult, and will be a hard struggle. I did several drawings at a very early hour. One in which one has a view through to a very small, glittering spot of green freshness is likely to be the ultimate one, I think.   It’s something like the above scratch; everything, including the women in the foreground and the white horse in the background, must be in chiaroscuro against the green patch with a chink of sky above. So that one gets the opposition of all those sombre sheds overlapping each other in perspective, and all that rubbish and those grey figures against something clean and fresh. The group of women and the horse create lighter passages in the tone of the chiaroscuro, and the rag-pickers and the dung-heaps darker areas. 
   In the foreground all kinds of broken and discarded objects, bits of old baskets, a rusty street-light, broken pots &c. While making these first two drawings, so many ideas and such a strong desire to do yet more have come to me that I don’t know where to start. But finally I’ve concentrated on the dung-heap. Well, Theo, we must keep up our spirits, and see that we carry on toiling energetically.  Even if we’re anxious at times and don’t know how we’ll pull through, that is nothing and cannot be otherwise. Those who persevere often triumph.  And just now, when sending the money is beginning to be doubly hard for you, there may perhaps be a real chance to place something.  If only you were here. It also occurred to me that, were he not prejudiced against having anything to do with me, perhaps Tersteeg could make use of these compositions in a smaller format, with sepia for example. If only you were here. Perhaps something could be arranged with him. I certainly don’t refuse to take the trouble to make something. As long as there’s no reconciliation with Tersteeg, however, and with C.M., and I have virtually no other resource than the money from you, do your best, for it seems to me that, now especially, much depends precisely on my continuing to work hard. Although I have hardly anything left, I have again made an appointment with the models for this new drawing, and today I’ll perhaps get a Scheveningen hat and cape with what I still have at the moment.  If I can get hold of the patched cape, old chap, then I’ll have my female figures for the foreground of the drawing of the rag-pickers, I’m sure of that.  And it’s a start with looking for other female figures for Scheveningen drawings too.  My dear Theo, Today I received a letter from home and I wanted to talk to you about it, although Pa doesn’t mention you in the letter, because in the circumstances you might perhaps like to know something about their state of mind, above and beyond what they may write to you directly. And my impression is that for the present you may be entirely at ease on that score.  The letter in question is Pa’s first since his visit1 and is very amiable and cordial and was accompanied by a package containing a coat, a hat, a packet of cigars, a cake, a money order. In the letter was the outline of a sermon, by far the best part of which I thought was the biblical text, and which made less of an impression on me than a few words about the funeral of a farm labourer later on.  And otherwise that Ma was at Princenhage3 and domestic details.  Well, the reason I’m telling you this at such length is so that you’ll see from it that there’s no particular tension or anything abnormal; rather, I got the impression that Pa’s mood was more passive or resigned, tending towards good-natured melancholy, more so than one would expect if one were to go only by the expressions of objections you wrote to me about.  So I think those words were intended more as advice or warning (advice that in the end has no solid grounds in my view, and doesn’t hold water) and less as a sign of definite resistance or opposition to your firm decision.  They may think that you haven’t yet made up your mind, or they may believe that you haven’t given it enough thought.  Because in my last letter I disapproved so strongly of what Pa had said4 — and still disapprove of it now, being decidedly of the opposite opinion inasmuch as I don’t consider it appropriate in this case to raise objections to do with money and religion — I wanted to soften my words, in the sense that I believe that it’s a question here of a fault (at any rate a fault in my view) that lies more in Pa’s words than in his heart and mood.  And I have in mind to talk to you about how Pa is an old man and so deeply fond of you, and you’ll find, I believe, that he’ll accept your view if there’s no alternative, even if it conflicts with his own, yet couldn’t possibly accept estrangement from you or having less contact, etc.
   And adopting a humane point of view, I take back my opinion: ‘by saying that, they have shown they are unworthy of your trust and in my eyes you needn’t confide in them any further’, or something similar that I wrote then, I don’t remember exactly. But don’t misunderstand me, not because I disapprove less of what they said, but because I believe that in this case one shouldn’t take it too seriously, and there’s no pressing need to take up arms against it as long as it remains only words.  Cutting it short by saying something like, for example, ‘You take a rather gloomy view of the future’ and ‘can hardly demand from me that I act as if the end of the world were imminent’ is wiser in this case, I believe, than taking their words very seriously. It seems to me that Pa’s a little melancholy, though, and is perhaps fretting a little about you and imagining gloomy things — but again Pa writes not a syllable about it directly, and said not a word about it at the time of his visit. But not talking about it is in fact also rather abnormal. Anyway — I, too, know Pa quite well, and believe I can see signs of some melancholy.  If you want to help him, write quite lightly and cheerfully, and write about your visit this summer as though it’s certain you’ll see them again soon (even though you may not know yourself yet how you’ll fit your visit in as regards the time).  For perhaps, perhaps Pa himself is conscious of having gone a little too far, or worried about how you’ll take it, or afraid that you won’t come.  Of course I don’t know how matters stand and am only guessing, but I do think this, Pa is an old man and deserves to have people cheer him up if they can.
   You know well enough that in my view you ought to be loyal to the woman; there’s no question of my saying anything less about that than I did, but do what’s right and don’t blame Pa if he’s mistaken. That’s what I wanted to say. Don’t even refer to the fact that he’s mistaken unless he keeps going on, perhaps he’ll retract of his own accord. Now a word about the work. Today I asked for permission to draw sketches in the old men’s and old women’s home, namely the men’s ward, the women’s ward and the garden. I was there today. From the window I sketched an old gardener by a crooked apple tree, and the workshop of the home’s carpenter, where I drank tea with two orphan men.  I can go into the men’s ward as a visitor. It was very real, inexpressibly real.  A small chap with a long, thin neck in a chair on rollers, among others, was priceless.  In the carpenter’s workshop, with a view of the cool, green garden with those two old boys, it was just like the scene in, for example, that photo by Bingham after that small painting by Meissonier, the two priests sitting drinking. Perhaps you know the one I mean. Whether I’ll get permission isn’t, however, entirely certain, and has to be applied for from the assistant deacon, which I’ve done and have to go back for the answer.  Apart from that, I’m working out how to draw the dung-heap. I wrote to you that I had hopes of getting a Scheveningen cape, well, I’ve got it, and an old hat thrown in which isn’t particularly beautiful, but the cape is superb and I immediately started working with it. Am just as pleased with it as I was with the sou’wester before.
   And I’ve got as far with the sketch of the dung-heap as more or less getting into it that sheep-shed effect of inside against outside — the light under the dark sheds — and the group of women emptying their dustbins is beginning to develop and take shape.  Now the wheelbarrows going up and down and the rag-pickers with dung forks, that grubbing about under the sheds, has still to be expressed without losing the effect of light and shade of the whole. On the contrary, it must be strengthened as a result. I believe you’ll have your own, similar view of Pa’s words, and so I’m not telling you anything new, but because I spoke so sharply about it I wanted you to know at the same time that I don’t do such a thing with pleasure but with regret, and would be glad if peace could be kept with a little geniality.  This winter Pa was pretty much against my being with the woman just as much as now, yet he sent a warm coat ‘in case I could make use of it’, not specifying what for but obviously with the idea ‘she may be cold’. Well, you see, that is right after all, and for one such deed I would gladly put up with a deluge of words. Because I myself am not one of those who don’t fail in words either — such people would be perfect — and don’t make the slightest claim to perfection.  And wanted to point out to you that in any case Pa14 objects to my being with the woman, MUCH MORE SO indeed than with you, and despite that last winter he still no doubt thought something like: ‘that wretched woman — but she shouldn’t suffer from the cold’. Now, probably the same in your case: ‘that poor papist woman shouldn’t be alone even so’, or something like that. So don’t be concerned, be of good heart, and put their minds at ease.  Adieu, old chap, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Your letter and the contents were truly welcome, many thanks for them.  And I was pleased to see that you were taking things calmly, and indeed I had expected nothing else. I mean as regards the objections raised.  Well, since I last wrote I’ve slaved away at that drawing of the dung-heap. It’s a splendid sight.  The first drawing of it has already undergone so many changes — now white here, then black again at various places — that I transferred it to a second paper because the first was too worn. And am now working again on that. I have to get up early in the morning, for that’s when I see the effects I want. If only I could get it as I have it in my mind.  Well, the second is the same size as the two earlier ones of the peat-cutting and the sand quarry, and can go in the frame. There is effect in it at the moment, but I fear I’ll spoil it again. But one mustn’t be afraid of that, otherwise one will never get anywhere. And in the meantime I’ve also done a large study of a woman sewing.  But I’ve had a disappointment with the Orphanage in that I have not been given permission to draw there — there were, they said, no precedents of that kind and, furthermore, they were going to clean and lay new floors in the wards. Well, it’s not too bad for there are other orphanages, it’s just that in this one I know a man who has modelled for me regularly, and that would have made it easier for me to do sketches.
   Last winter I saw the old men’s home at Voorburg. Smaller, of course, but almost more typical.  On that day, it was near evening, the old boys were sitting on benches and chairs around an old cannon stove, very real.  Perhaps I’ll try that one in Voorburg now I can’t do it here.  Also went to Scheveningen for a day and saw a fine sight of fellows there with a cart full of nets that had been tanned and spread out on the dunes. I’ll definitely tackle that or the nets being mended in a large drawing sometime.  It certainly is an improvement, Theo, that I had those stretching frames and frame made for charcoal drawings or whatever it may be, for working with them is a pleasure.  What you say about spending too much time with painters being not good but some time being all right is true, I believe. And for that reason, too, I’m glad Van der Weele comes to call.  Yes, one sometimes feels a longing to discuss it with people in the know. And especially when one works and searches in the same spirit, one can give each other great strength and stimulus, and one isn’t easily discouraged.
   One can’t always live outside the fatherland, and the fatherland isn’t just nature; to that must be added human hearts that seek and feel the same. It’s only then that the fatherland is complete and one feels at home.   This is now the composition of the dung-heap. I don’t know how much sense you can make of it. In the front women emptying dustbins, behind them the sheds where the dung is stored, and the fellows at work with wheelbarrows &c.  The first one I did was a little different:8 there were two other fellows in the foreground with sou’westers, which they often wear in bad weather, and the group of women was more in the dark. Yet that light effect really is there, since the light falls from above between the sheds onto the figures that are on the paths. It would be a splendid sight to paint. I think you understand all about it, I wish I could talk to Mauve about it. But perhaps it’s even better not to. For getting advice from another person doesn’t always help someone to make progress, however clever the person may be, and the cleverest aren’t always clever when it comes to explaining something clearly. Again, I don’t know myself what is desirable. For the present, painting is far from being my main goal, and perhaps I’d get it ready for an illustrated magazine quicker on my own than if someone who would never consider illustrated magazines gave me advice.  I get on with Rappard best of all. Adieu, old chap, best wishes in everything and thanks for the timely dispatch. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Do you remember that not long ago I wrote to you ‘I’m sitting in front of two big blank stretching frames and don’t yet know how I’ll get anything onto them’?  Well since then, you know, the dung-heap has come on one, and in the past few days I’ve made good progress with the second. It’s to be a coal-yard on the Rijnspoor site as I see it from the window of the studio. There are heaps of coal and fellows working in them, and people come with small wheelbarrows to buy a sack of coal; trade is very busy some days, and especially in the winter, with the snow it was a charming scene. Had been thinking about it for a long time and recently I saw it looking so beautiful one evening and did my sketch in such a way that I’ve since changed little of what I put down then as regards the broad outlines of the composition. At the place itself I had a fellow who scrambled up the heaps and stood here and there so that I could see the proportion of the figure at various places. But I’ve since done various figure studies for it, although the figures come out small.  Just while I’m doing these studies, a plan for an even larger drawing, namely of the potato-digging, begins to take root in me. And the way I have it in my mind, you might perhaps see something in it.  I would like the landscape to be a flat area and a small line of dunes.
   The figures just about one foot high, the composition breadthways, 1 to 2.  In a corner in the foreground kneeling figures of women gathering up the potatoes as a repoussoir.  A row of diggers, men and women, in the background. And take the perspective of the area so that in the other corner of the drawing from where the women are gathering up, I get the spot where the wheelbarrows come.  Now, apart from the figures of the kneeling women, I could already show you the other figures in large studies.  Yes, I want to start on these drawings in the next few days, I have the sites pretty well in my head, and shall seek out a fine potato field at my convenience and do studies of it for the lines of the landscape.  The drawing ought to be complete, as a worked-up sketch at any rate, towards the autumn, when the lifting takes place, and I’d only have the tone and the finishing to do.  I saw it here last year, and the year before last at Het Heike, where it was splendid, and the year before that in the Borinage, where it was done by miners. Anyway, this is how it has ripened in my mind. The figures ought to be such that it’s true everywhere, and more than a costume study. Well, that blank canvas preoccupies me in spite of everything else, and while making studies I’m always looking for new ones to add. The row of diggers should be just a row of dark shapes at first sight or from a distance, but highly finished and varied in movement and type.
   For instance, a young, plain fellow opposite one of those really typical old Scheveningers in a white and brown patched suit with an old top hat, one of those matt black ones that they wear low in the neck. For instance, a short, stocky figure of a woman in sober black with a white cap opposite a tall grass-mower5 in white trousers, light blue smock and straw hat — a bald crown next to a young woman. These ideas come to me precisely by putting the studies I already have opposite each other. We’ll see. But be that as it may, I’ve bought a large stretching frame (an old painting frame) from Laarman and covered it.  And it’s becoming clearer to me day by day, but it’s devilishly difficult to find figures that look right as opposites and can still find a place in the same, very confined space. And one has to do each one perhaps 3 or more times before it works out. But I’ll make a start on it and do the same as with the dung-heap, that is, begin again later on another stretching frame if the first doesn’t come out as I want. But wanted to have it relatively finished towards the time for potato digging, even though I’ll then have to go over it again completely on another piece of paper.  It’s good that I went to Rappard that time, for it was actually there that I got the idea of starting on the larger drawings, and I’ve noticed that while one composes one feels more exactly what studies one must make. These days I’m working with a great deal of pleasure and without getting especially tired, because of the enjoyment I feel.  I had long restrained myself from composing, as you know, and in that respect a revolution has now come about in me because it was time it came, and I breathe more freely now that I’ve slightly slackened the rein I had imposed on myself. But I still believe it was a good thing that I toiled away just at studies for such a long time, for it’s the same with everything, and particularly with the figure: one must study a great deal and not imagine that one can do it. I find Mauve’s words very fine: after all his work and experience he still says ‘sometimes I still don’t know where the knobbles are on a cow’.
   For my part, what I often do these days is that if I’m drawing a digger who has one leg in front of the other, or his one arm in front of the other, or his head leaning forwards, I first draw in detail the leg, the arm or the neck and back of the head that’s behind the one in front and hence out of view, and only afterwards on top of that what’s in sight, to get it as accurate as possible.  I hope I’ll succeed in getting down the shadow or the ghost of the potato drawing by the time you come. I long for you. Don’t you know anything more definite about when you’ll be coming? Well, I must get back to my coal workers. All the cash I have at the moment is a money order for 1.  1/2  guilders which is torn in two and has already been refused once. So I don’t need to tell you that I’ll be looking forward to your letter keenly. I’ve covered the big stretching frame so that I have a distraction and can still work in the days before receipt again if perhaps I can’t get a model. But perhaps I can get one after all.  My Scheveningen cape is a splendid possession, I have three detailed studies with it, a woman with a dustbin9 and two with wheelbarrows. When you send again I hope to take a fisherman’s jacket with a stand-up collar and short sleeves and a woman’s hat. The women’s hats are expensive and hard to obtain, it seems. Still, I have one if need be. There must be Scheveningen Drawings as well, and soon. This time last year I was in the hospital11 — I think the painted studies from last summer are poor and wrong — I thought of this because I’ve just looked up an old painted study of that coal-yard12 to see how they were done last year. Now I consider them too carelessly and hastily done. In short, I’ve since concentrated on figure drawing again, and I think of painting only very indirectly. Well, adieu, write as soon as you can and good luck with everything. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Shortly after I sent my letter to you I received a characteristic letter from Rappard which I wanted to send to you to read because you used to know him1 and haven’t seen him recently. I think you’ll see in this letter (from the serious tone in general) what I wrote to you about my finding him so much improved2 (although I thought he was good in the past too). His drawings are really devilishly good, and what he does is honest work. Anyway, read the letter, it seems to me such a robust attitude to things. Send the letter back to me later. Had something else to tell you — I wrote to you about my plan for a large drawing3 — well, I began work on it the same day I wrote to you, precisely because R.’s letter made me enthusiastic. I’ve carried on working on it ever since, and it has so absorbed me that I even worked on it through almost the whole of last night. I got my eye in and wanted to push on. I’ve changed it into a simple composition, namely just a row of diggers. I’ve sketched 7 of the figures, 5 men and two women. The remainder will be smaller in the background. It is, I believe, the most forceful drawing I’ve done so far, and as regards the approach, my thoughts on that subject are similar to what R. says in his letter. Like him, I arrive at the manner of some of the English without thinking of them in order to imitate them, but probably because I’m attracted by such things in nature and they’re done by relatively few, and so if one does them one must find a way to depict what one feels and go somewhat wide of the normal rules to express what one wants. (Just as in the drawing in question Rappard drew all kinds of machines in operation which otherwise almost no one would dare to tackle, and which are beyond what’s normally thought of as picturesque.)4
   Do you know what Rappard’s drawing is like? It’s as if one were reading a description of a factory by Zola or Daudet or Lemonnier. I’ve marked a passage in his letter — the one about painting like drawing. Well, it comes down to about the same as what I said last year to some who said to me, painting is drawing with colour, to which I replied, Yes, exactly, and drawing in Black and White is in fact painting in white and black. They said, painting is drawing — I, drawing is painting. But then I was still too weak in my execution to be able to say it in something other than words, and now I say it less in words and more silently in work. Since you wrote to me about your being in relative financial difficulties, I’ve really worked day and night in a kind of fury. I’ve now started work on the fifth large one, or rather the sixth, because I did the dung-heap twice. And when you come you’ll see the number of studies required for them. R. has not drawn with printer’s ink, but I have here and there. But what he says is true — he works in a white passe-partout and then the black seems blacker; I work in a brown passe-partout with a black inside edge which is a very deep black, precisely in order to keep the drawing clear. As for the English not using printer’s ink, he’s quite wrong. For they work the drawings up precisely by using tremendous strengths sometimes, which still make the greatest strengths of charcoal very clear. These strengths are obtained through printer’s ink or autographic ink or lampblack7 or neutral tint and other blacks from watercolour. You shouldn’t be surprised that I’ve done so many in a short time. Thinking and thinking through plays a role in composing a drawing almost more than in painting, and for my part I feel fine if I carry on as now, for instance, with this last one for a day and half a night. But in this way one can become productive too — it’s tremendously absorbing. But precisely when one is so strongly drawn by the work, one must continue with it until one is fit to drop, so to speak. I’m absolutely broke, send somewhat earlier if you can. I won’t sleep much tonight again because of the drawing. But it’s very pleasant with a pipe at night when everything’s quiet, and the dawn and the sunrise is glorious. Well, old chap, send soon if you can. Good fortune with everything, adieu. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, It’s not yet 4 o’clock. Yesterday evening there was thunder and last night it rained. It’s dry now but everything’s dripping and the sky is grey, but broken here and there by darker or lighter masses of cloud, neutral tint or yellowish white, which shift their position. Because it’s still so early the green is greyish and toned; along the small wet road comes a farmer in an indigo smock on a brown horse that he has fetched from a field. The city in the background is a grey silhouette, but also toned, in which the wet red roofs show up clearly. It’s more like Daubigny than Corot because of the variation of colour in the ground and the green, the vividness of everything. You would certainly enjoy it just as I do if you saw it. There’s nothing more beautiful than nature early in the morning. Your letter came yesterday and was more than welcome. Thank you for it. I was rather worried this time, I was absolutely broke. The woman had no milk left recently, and I felt weak too. Then I reached the point, in desperation, of going to Tersteeg. I thought, I have nothing to lose, perhaps it will be a way of stirring things back into life. And so I went there with the large sketch which I wrote to you about lately. It has become a row of Diggers, men and women, with a foreground of clods of earth and a view of some roofs in a village in the background. I said to Tersteeg that I understood very well that this sketch wasn’t something he could use, but that I’d come to see him partly because he’d seen nothing of my work for so long, and because for my part I wanted to give him proof that I didn’t wish for there to be continuing rancour about what had happened last year. Well, he said that he didn’t feel any rancour either, that as to the drawing he’d told me last year that I should do watercolours, and that he didn’t want to discuss it any further now because he didn’t want to end up repeating himself. I told him that I had since tried watercolour now and then and had several at the studio, but that in myself I felt greater warmth for different kinds of drawings and a growing passion for vigorously drawn figures. I also told him how it was on my mind that I still had Bargue’s drawing examples, that I would have returned them long ago if what happened last year had not been an impediment to speaking about them, but that I had come now to clear the matter up. That — since a few were damaged, although only slightly, through use, and I had also had a few other things at that time that were still outstanding — I hoped he would be willing 
   either now or later to accept a few of my drawings to settle up for everything, and I believed that he would appreciate my coming to him to settle the matter. Well, he thought that was very good and now fortunately the Bargues are back. And I told him that I had a great deal in the studio that he hadn’t seen.  He said he was pleased that he could see from the drawing that at least I was working, and I asked him if there was any reason to doubt that I was working. Well, a telegram came for him then and I left. At any rate the matter of the Bargues is off my mind and I’ve thanked him again for lending them to me at the time, for they had come in very useful. But now I don’t really know whether he found anything good in the drawing or not. Iterson had quite a lot to say about it, and so I have hope that there may be something good in it. And as for Tersteeg himself, it wouldn’t surprise me in the least if he considered it sheer madness or something absurd, precisely because he said he would rather stay out of it completely. But even if he thought it absurd or mad, I still believe I shouldn’t let myself be upset by that or regard his judgement as decisive or conclusive.  I still think it possible that the time will come when Tersteeg’s opinion of me changes, also as regards my conduct now and last year. But I’ll leave that largely to time, and if he continues to find all I do wrong, well, I’ll take that very coolly and quietly go my own way as if he didn’t exist. Otherwise I’ll let things take their course until, for example, you come here again, and I don’t regret having gone there after all.  I was very pleased that you wrote that you’re in good health. Have a good time, old chap. I too am having a fairly good time, except for a lot of financial worries, a lot of worries. Otherwise, the work is going well, 
   I’ve been working with an extraordinary amount of pleasure lately, and with a firm feeling that I’m ‘on a road’, as R. says of himself in the letter I sent you. Yes, old chap, if one perseveres and does it without being distracted by what already exists, if one honestly and freely tries to understand nature and doesn’t let go of what one has in mind, whatever people say, one feels calm and resolute and looks to the future. Yes, one can lapse into errors, into exaggerations of this or that perhaps, but one arrives at something original. You also read the remark in Rappard’s letter: ‘I used to do things now in this genre, now in that, without enough individuality. Well, these recent drawings at least have a character of their own, and I feel that I’ve found my way.’ These days I too have something like that.  Lately I read a curious comment in Taine (essay on Dickens). He says, ‘The essence of the English character is the absence of happiness’. I don’t think this view is entirely satisfactory or accurate, it doesn’t explain everything, but still it’s deuced well put and has much truth in it. A truly English remark is the one by Carlyle, ‘The result of an idea must not be a feeling but an action’. This approach to life, which forces a man to concentrate in the first place not on seeking his material happiness but on his work before all else in order to do something good, is something of which one finds many examples in England, and may perhaps be a national trait. Carlyle also says, ‘Knowest thou that Worship of sorrow — the temple thereof founded some eighteen hundred years ago now lies in ruins, yet its sacred lamp is still burning’. If I think of Degroux, say, or what you sometimes wrote to me of Daumier, say, I find in them something of worship of sorrow. The drawing in question that I took to Tersteeg wasn’t seen at its best in his small office in my view; it needs to be seen in the company of other drawings, then it looks very different.  Well, yesterday I worked on it again for the whole day to get the figures more finished. 
   Since I wrote to you I’ve also done 4 large studies for the potato harvest.  These days they lift the potatoes around here with a fork, with a short handle, and the worker is on his knees. I imagine something good could be done with these kneeling figures on a flat piece of land in the evening. Something that would have a certain mood of devotion. So I’ve studied it from close up and have a man who is sticking one of these forks in the ground (the first movement), another who is pulling out the potato plant (the second movement), then a female figure in the same action and a third male figure who is throwing the potatoes into the basket. I’ll start work on these today or tomorrow, but I want one of the male figures to have a bald skull. For the studies I already have I had a young farm labourer, a really typical figure with something broad and rough and unpolished about him.  As for these drawings, Theo, I don’t suppose I’ll sell them, but still I think of what Israëls said to Van der Weele about his big painting:12 you certainly won’t sell it but don’t be discouraged by that; you’ll make more friends through it and sell something else.  If I can manage it sometime and have a little more cash, I’ll do on canvas the kind of detailed sketch I do now on paper, and paint again. But I’ll have to have a lot of modelling for it or it certainly won’t work. Otherwise I do have a few things in mind that could be painted.  I’ve had no reply from C.M. to my letter and so I shan’t write again soon.  Well, Theo, I have precious, precious little chance of placing anything. It wasn’t a pleasant step to go to Tersteeg but I did it anyway, thinking perhaps, perhaps he’ll be prepared to forgive and forget everything completely on both sides. But he hasn’t reached that point yet, that was clear enough to me, and I believe it’s still the case that he thinks, as you described to me very correctly at the time, ‘now he’s bothered by the way I’d shake his hand’, in short, those little antipathies that make one prefer not to see someone.  I’m a little worried, last year, as you know, I sometimes had something extra from you and now since February or since March, I believe, you yourself have been hard up.
    I don’t know how I’ll carry on, and the expenses mount up quicker than I can keep up with, although I cut down on everything, and the woman no less.  The money from R. gave me some leeway for a moment to prepare myself for the large drawings, but the large drawings cost a lot in models.  And the stretching frames15 and the paper &c. each time too, and moreover I don’t do fewer small ones because of them. So the days are hard to bear and difficult to get through for the woman and for me, because of scrimping on everything.  I told Tersteeg that I very much wished to be on good terms with Mauve once more, but he didn’t give me so much as a word in reply. The overall impression I bring back from my visit to Tersteeg is that I would have thought it kinder if, given that such an awfully long time has since passed, he had suddenly referred to it lightly, but there remained an element of gloominess and of ‘Have you come to pester me again? Keep away from me.’ He didn’t say that, for he spoke in very measured terms, but in the light of what he might have donea — namely say something like, I think it’s right that we should make up and I’ll come round and have a look sometime, or something like that — in my view the above was implied to some extent. But I may have got it wrong, and I’ll let time pass again and see if it remedies itself, and shall hope for the best.  I must carry on working hard, precisely because I do indeed have hope that some things will remedy themselves and come right. What I hope more than anything else is that when you come you’ll see progress and find something good in the work. You’ve sometimes written to me that you saw something in it, and I don’t believe that you are mistaken and Tersteeg is right, with his absolute indifference that’s almost hostile. Yes, that’s the foremost thing I value, that you, who have done so much, indeed everything, from the beginning onwards, should be able to maintain that there’s something good in it. If I were able to bring that about, I’d forget the cares of the whole year when you came.
   There’s one thing that gives me hope that there was some character in the large sketch, namely that Iterson commented that various things ‘bothered’ him and that he thought them ‘unfortunate’. You can just imagine Iterson, with a friendly-looking, wise-like face, with his head a little to one side and expressing his feeling gently and sweetly with a certain undulating weightiness. I was rather entertained by his observations. Eerelman, the painter, was also there and was more or less in agreement with Iterson, which seemed to me entirely understandable.  I think you’ll agree with me that this can perhaps be a step towards making things up again, even if Tersteeg doesn’t want to immediately. One or other must take a step towards reconciliation, but for now I’ll wait until I’ve spoken to you again. I imagine that among the many figures I have there may be some of which Tersteeg might say, if he ever saw them, I’d like to see this one or that one in this or that format in watercolour. In that case I wouldn’t refuse to try it, not for my own pleasure but in the hope of possibly selling something that way. But those aren’t the only things that I think possible. For in the future I’ll make things very different from what I’ve done up to now. I know from my own experience how one can have a dislike for someone’s work or be indifferent to it, and feel that for a long time until, one day, one suddenly sees something by him, thinks about it and remembers his earlier work and says to oneself, wait a minute, that must be good after all — and then one enjoys it, one can’t help holding on to it and is won over.
   I did that with the English manner particularly. I didn’t find it at all beautiful immediately and first thought, exactly like most people here, that the English were in fact completely wrong, but in my case that didn’t last, and I learned to see things from another angle.  Do you know what I sometimes long for? A trip to Brabant. I would so like to do the old churchyard at Nuenen. And the weavers. To do Brabant studies again for a month, say, and to come back with a batch of them for a large drawing of a country funeral, for example.  I end by repeating that when you write in your last letter that this is a good time for you, I can say the same. As regards the work, I have a great deal of serenity and cheerfulness and so much to do that it completely absorbs me. But as to money, things are wretched, I have more expenses than I can keep up with.
   Do you know what I thought of lately? That book on Gavarni that you have. From that I remembered how by his own account Gavarni’s drawings of London drunkards and beggars &c. only began to go fluently when he’d been there for quite a while, after a year I believe, and he writes in a letter that it takes time to become familiar with a setting.  Well, I’m certainly starting to feel at home here compared with the beginning, and find what I did here in the beginning very superficial. And the very hope of expressing it more and more powerfully and elaborately means that it seems to me a good time, for now I have no lack of subjects and models (in so far as I can pay them). I’m full of ideas and plans, and so the worries haven’t overwhelmed me yet.  But one still has to pay and everything costs money, and one has to deal with obstacles which are rather like wrestling through a hedge of thorns. And it truly is the case that in fact I really ought to have more models, but I can’t take more; I do my utmost and more than my utmost, so to speak, as regards expenditure on them, but the housekeeping costs money too, and in fact I don’t really have enough. What to do? Do you still remember people from your time in The Hague to whom you think I could show something? For my part I can’t remember any except for one, and that is Lantsheer, but for him it must be very, very beautiful, and because I hope to sell something to him later I would rather not present anything now. Lantsheer is an uncle of Rappard or something like that. Rappard once wrote to me that he’d shown him a sketch by me and that L. thought it was good. If I ever have something which I think is right for him, I could get in touch with him through R. I know almost for certain that once Rappard has seen the larger drawings he’ll talk to L. about me, even without my asking him. I don’t like doing it, seeking people out. I wouldn’t mind if it was someone else’s work, but now it’s my own. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve written to you quite often lately, but it comes down to the same thing so much that I’m in fact dissatisfied that I don’t write to you more entertainingly. That will come again eventually — I think that once you’ve been to the studio again there will be livelier material. At least I hope so, and that will be the case if you’re in sympathy with what I’m working on and you haven’t yet seen.  This week in Paris Illustré I saw a fine reproduction of a drawing by Ulysse Butin, Launching the boat. Fishermen and women pushing a boat into the sea. I saw it just as I couldn’t help thinking a great deal about Butin and Legros while looking for something that’s a completely different subject from what they do, namely the potato grubbers on their knees and working with short forks, about whom I recently wrote to you that I was doing studies for them. I now have a sketch of them on the easel with 4 figures, 3 men and 1 woman. I wanted to have something broad and bold in silhouette and delineation in it. I’m searching for that more and more. I still remember how the first painting by Butin I saw (one of his later ones) made a strong impression on me. It was the one he later etched himself, called The pier I believe, women looking out for ships that are due to come in on a stormy evening. That was the first thing of his that I saw, and since then the one in the Luxembourg5 and several others.
   I find him very honest and thorough, and believe that precisely when he appears to have dashed something off quickly he remains no less sound and correct in his drawing after all. He’s one of those men I don’t know personally and yet, when I see something by him, I can imagine how he did it.  Don’t you think the painting by Blommers at the Salon is beautiful (November)? I haven’t seen the painting but the reproduction, I think it’s just as if it were by Butin, with more passion and a greater dramatic element than B. normally has.  At the moment I have no fewer than 7 or 8 drawings measuring about 1 metre that I’m working on, so you can imagine that I’m up to my ears in work. But I’m very hopeful that I can make my hand more skilled through this period of toil. Thus, for instance, the reluctance I felt to work with charcoal is disappearing day by day. One of the reasons is that I’ve found a way of fixing the charcoal and then going over it with something else, such as printer’s ink.  
   Here’s a scratch of potato grubbers, but they’re slightly further apart in the drawing. Now as I write to you I think of that evening — you may remember it even though it was years ago — when you and I spent an evening together with Mauve when he still lived near the Barracks, and were given a photograph after a drawing by him, a plough. Little did I think then that I would make drawings myself. Little did I also think then that difficulties would arise between Mauve and me. I continue to be rather surprised that it hasn’t come right, all the more so because when you get down to it there’s virtually nothing about which there is a difference of view.  It’s now so long ago, in fact, that these days I’m beginning to regain my good humour as regards work, and confidence that it will be all right. I used to have that before, in spite of everything, but one can’t help being upset all the same, and feeling melancholy when such people disapprove or say that what one is doing is the wrong direction.  Will you write soon? Your letter will be most welcome again as always. Would you believe that a figure a foot high is not a bit easier to draw than a smaller one? On the contrary — everything is much more critical — and to get it as forceful in proportion as small figures at that size is sometimes very hard labour. Adieu, old chap, have good days and just do good business. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Your letter and the enclosure were not a little welcome, and the message that you’ll write again at greater length no less welcome. I hope you’ll write to me in detail about the hundred masterpieces;1 it must be good to have seen something like that. And when one remembers — at the time there were some people who were rather suspect as regards their character, intentions and genius, according to public opinion, people of whom the most absurd things were said, Millet, Corot, Daubigny, etc., who were regarded more or less the way the village constable regards a stray shaggy dog or a tramp without a passport, and time passes and lo and behold ‘the hundred masterpieces’, and if a hundred isn’t enough, then innumerable. Let alone what becomes of the village constables. Little remains of them except some notes of the testimony as a curiosity. Yet it remains a drama, I believe, the history of the great men — given too that they not only had to deal with village constables during their lifetimes, since usually they’re no longer with us when their work is publicly recognized, and during their lifetimes they were under some pressure for a long time because of the opposition and the difficulty of struggling through life. And so whenever I hear of the public recognition of the merits of some people, I think all the more of the quiet, slightly sombre figures of those who had few personal friends, and in their simpliity I find them even greater and more poignant like that.  There’s an etching by Legros — Carlyle in his study2 — which often comes to mind when I want to imagine Millet or anyone else as he was.  What V. Hugo says about Aeschylus: ‘They killed the man and then they say: “let us put up a bronze statue of Aeschylus”’;3 something of that is always in my mind when I hear of an exhibition of someone’s work. So I don’t look much at ‘the bronze statue’. Not because I disapprove of something being publicly honoured, but because of the association, they killed the man. Aeschylus was simply banished, but here too banishment was a death sentence, as it often is. 
   Theo, when you come to the studio I’ll be able to show you some things that you’ll most certainly not be able to see all together anywhere else. I could show you some things that one might call the hundred masterpieces of modern wood engraving. Work by people whose names, even, are totally unknown to most art lovers. Who knows of Buckman, who knows of the two Greens, who knows of Régamey’s drawings? Only a few. Seeing them all together, one is astonished by that steadiness of the drawing, that personal character, that seriousness of approach, and that fathoming and presentation of the most everyday figures and subjects found on the street, on the market, in a hospital or orphanage. I already had some last year, but what I’ve found since goes far beyond my expectations. It’s agreed, isn’t it, that your visit to the studio when you come won’t be too brief? I’ve worked on the potato grubbers since writing to you. And begun a second one of the same subject with a single figure of an old man. I’m also working on a sower on a large field with clods of earth, which I believe is better than the other sowers I tried before. I have at least 6 studies of the figure himself, but now I’ve placed him in the space more specifically as the drawing proper, and carefully studied the land and sky as well. And then I have studies for the burning of weeds and stalks, and of a chap with a sack of potatoes on his back. And one with a wheelbarrow. If I now reflect with all possible good will (in order to see things differently, supposing I was wrong) on Tersteeg’s opinion that I should do watercolours, 
   then I can’t understand how these figures of the chap with a sack, of the sower, of the old potato grubber, of the wheelbarrows, of the weed burner could keep their personal character if I attacked them with watercolour. The result would be something very mediocre, of the sort of mediocre which I don’t care to go into in depth. Now at least they have character, something that’s in harmony — though distantly — with what Lhermitte, for instance, is seeking. Watercolour isn’t the most sympathetic means for anyone who particularly wants to express the boldness, the robustness and the force of the figures. If one is looking more exclusively for tone or colour, then it’s rather different, then watercolour lends itself excellently to that. Now I do admit that one could do different studies of those same figures in reality from a different point of view (namely tone and colour), done with a different intention — yet I ask, if my frame of mind and personal feeling makes me notice first of all the character, the structure, the action of the figures, will I be blamed if, following this emotion, I arrive not at a watercolour but at a drawing in black and brown only?  Yet there are watercolours in which the outlines are very forcefully expressed, such as those by Régamey, those by Pinwell and Walker and Herkomer, which I certainly think about sometimes (those of the Belgian Meunier), but even if I sought that, Tersteeg would still not be content with it. Keep on saying, it isn’t saleable and the saleable must be your no. 1. For my part I see in that in plainer terms ‘you’re a mediocrity11 and you’re pretentious in not submitting yourself and not making small mediocre things; you make yourself ridiculous with your so-called seeking, and don’t work.’ This is implied in what Tersteeg said to me the year before last and last year, and I’m still faced with it. 
   To me Tersteeg will I think remain ‘the everlasting no’.  Not only I but almost all who seek their own way have something like this behind or beside them as a perpetual discourager. Sometimes one is burdened by it and feels wretched and, so to speak, overwhelmed.  But, as said, it’s the everlasting no. Against that, one finds an everlasting yes in the example of men of character, and sees collier’s faith in them.  It is so, however, that life sometimes becomes sombre and the future dark when working costs money and one feels oneself going ever deeper into the ground the harder one works, instead of work helping one to stay above water and one being able to overcome the difficulties and costs by making a greater effort.  I’m making progress with my figures, but financially I’m losing ground and can’t keep up.  And of late I’ve sometimes thought of moving to the country, either on the seashore or somewhere where work on the land is real. Because I believe it would save some money. I could do what I want here as well if I could earn some more — go here and there now and again to get studies. And the advantage here is that my studio is good, and one isn’t completely outside the art world, after all. In any event, one can hardly do entirely without some measure of contact, seeing and hearing something now and again.  I sometimes think of going to England — in London a new magazine of importance has been established, The Pictorial News, of the same standing as L. News and The Graphic, perhaps there may be work and a salary there. But what can one say about it for sure? I hope you’ll come soon, a year is a long time not to have seen each other while thinking of each other all the time.
   I haven’t asked you for details about the woman recently because I’m confident that you two love each other, and that’s the main thing, and if one knows that there’s no need to ask about details.  Our little man15 is now just one year old, since 1 July, and is the most cheerful, most agreeable child you can imagine, and I believe it’s an important point gained as regards the recovery and complete cure of the woman herself that this child is doing well and keeps her busy and draws her thoughts towards him. I sometimes think that otherwise it might be good for her to spend some time in the country and not see the city and be away from her family; this could help to bring about a radical improvement. For she is improved now, but still, the influence of her family obstructs a great deal at times, I wanting to have simplicity and she being urged to intrigue and be two-faced. Well, she’s what one might call a child of her time, and her character has been influenced by her circumstances, so that the remnants will always persist in the form of a certain dejection and indifference and lack of a firm belief in one thing and another. I’ve already thought of country life for her many, many times. But moving also means spending a large amount in one go. And I’d also like to be married before I moved, if it came to going to the country or to London.  Here I miss the necessary friction with others, and I don’t see how that will get any better. In the end, one place or another will do for me, and I prefer to move as little as possible.  Write to me above all as soon as you can decide anything about when you’re coming. Lately I’ve been in two minds about various things, and consequently 
   under strain, and that will continue until we’ve seen each other again and talked about the future.  I recently read articles about Holland by Boughton. They were written to accompany illustrations by him and by Abbey in which there are splendid things.  I made a note of something from it — a description of the island of Marken — it makes me want to go there. When one had once got round to settling somewhere where it was very beautiful, who knows how happy one would feel about it? But in that sort of situation one needs at least one point of contact with the art world, because of course the fishing folk know nothing about it, and one has to live. Above all write the promised letter about the one hundred masterpieces &c., and should you do well in business and if a little extra is possible, it wouldn’t be untimely. As for living in the country — I find nature beautiful, and yet there are many things tying me to the city, the magazines especially, the opportunities for reproduction. I wouldn’t mind not seeing locomotives, but never seeing a printing press again would be harder to take. Adieu, old chap, with a handshake and thanks again for what you sent. Ever yours, Vincent. I read ‘Mes haines’ by Zola — there are strong things in it, although in my view he is greatly mistaken, not even mentioning Millet in his general reflections. I do think this is true: note that what pleases the public is always what’s most banal, what we’re accustomed to seeing every year; we’re used to insipidities of that kind, to such pretty lies, that we reject powerful truths with all our might. My dear Theo. If you’re like me you sometimes have a sudden desire to look up someone you haven’t seen in a long time. This is what happened to me with De Bock, and I wanted to write to you about what I saw at his place. Because you also know him from the past, even better than I do. The first thing I saw there in the hall was a large sketch — an enormous windmill, entirely covered in snow, beside a kind of canal or waterway. Half romantic, half realistic — a combination of styles I find not unsympathetic. But it was far from finished — but energetically tackled, and there was a fine, forceful effect in it. Anyway, something that one always sees with pleasure, and it doesn’t bother me that it isn’t finished — I’d like to have that piece by him hanging in my studio just as it is, because it’s so expressive. Another sketch, that of the painting in the Salon, was also beautiful, I thought, but even more romantic. There were also a few paintings with blonder accents, various pleasing studies. The impression I got of him himself was just about the same as last year, perhaps a shade more positive and more serious. I thought some sketches maturer and more correct in tone and colour than last year, and the grounds firmer. But in my view too much of the relative proportions of the planes and masses is still left vague; keeping an eye on this sort of proportion is the hallmark of Corot and Rousseau and Diaz, Daubigny, Dupré. What they all have in common, in my view, is that they pay careful attention to that, 
   and with them the backgrounds are always expressive and not so disengaged. There are very spirited things in De Bock’s work, though, and one would view it with more pleasure if the way things stand in their place was less visionary. He ought to be rather more of a realist and then his work would be more brilliant.  I also can’t understand why he doesn’t have some more variety. To give an example, this week I did a few landscape studies as well, one yesterday at De Bock’s, a potato field in the dunes;5 the day before a spot under the chestnut trees;6 another, a yard with heaps of coal. Now it’s relatively rare for me to get round to drawing landscape, but when I get round to it I immediately have 3 very different subjects. Why doesn’t he, a specialized landscape painter, do that much, much more instead of it always being a dune with a tree and a bit of marram grass? All very fine in itself, but there’s so much that is just as fine and ought to attract him, one would imagine.  Anyway, you know all about that, again my impression of him is that he has most certainly not gone downhill.
   Well, I wrote to you recently that I had been thinking about moving, mainly in order to be closer to the sea. I talked to Bock about houses in Scheveningen, but I must stop saying the rent for my studio is high when I compare it with the costs that others have; for instance, the house where Blommers used to live9 is to let — the rent is 400 guilders and I pay 170 guilders a year. Moreover, the studio is no bigger than mine, and as for the suitability of the house I would stick to what I have now. De Bock himself pays the same as Blommers. And this is in line with what I heard last year about average rents. If it was a question of going to live by the sea, Scheveningen wouldn’t be possible and one would have to go further away, Hook of Holland, say, or Marken.  Now, though, I’m thinking of asking De Bock to let me have a corner of his attic11 as a pied-à-terre and then leaving my equipment there so that I don’t need to lug it around. If one arrives tired (if one didn’t need to work immediately that slight fatigue wouldn’t matter, of course), the work is sometimes weak and the hand is none too steady. One is just hot and tired enough to be bothered by it if one walks and has to lug everything around.  So that pied-à-terre at De Bock’s and taking the tram more often might perhaps be enough to be able to do something with the sea and Scheveningen after all, more seriously than I’ve done so far.
   De Bock is to come to my place this week and we’re to discuss it further. He’s thinking of moving himself and has rented until May, and said that his house might stand empty for several months after all. We’ll see. He asked after you warmly, and I said you’d probably visit him this summer. His big painting in the Salon not sold of course. What did you think of that? The reviews were rather mixed. I think it will work out, to be at Scheveningen often this autumn with a pied-à-terre at his place. We’ll see — but I yearn very much to do something with the beach.  Did a study this week of a barge puller and a peat carrier12 and I’m still working on the potato grubbers. I hope that, taking a turn now with Bock, I’ll be able to get on with him; it could14 do both of us no harm, and perhaps we can learn from each other.  He’s bought a lot of antiques and his place looks very attractive, but I imagine it must have cost him a great deal. Will you write soon? Now I’ve written to you about Bock as I did recently about Rappard, that way you hear something about our acquaintances. Rappard is travelling, still he wrote to me that he had got round after all to using printer’s ink as I told him, and that it worked much better that way, namely with turpentine.  You know that I’ve always said my present studio was good, especially after the alterations. Really, if I think now of changing — I would much rather arrange things so that I don’t need to move, because compared with others I’m very well off. Well, one is always attached to something one has furnished oneself and one feels at home there.  See that you send me something soon, old chap, for I need it badly.  De Bock has also taken to reading Zola and had read Le Nabab by Daudet17 as well. Do you know Germinie Lacerteux by Jules and E. de Goncourt? That’s supposed to be very good, in the manner of Zola. I’m going to get hold of it.  I’ve ordered an instrument that’s known as a fixer which enables one to fix a charcoal drawing out of doors while one works, then one can work it up. Am looking forward to it. With Bock I’ve found splendid potato fields in the dunes behind the lighthouse.  Regards, old chap, I wish you well, and write soon. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Of late I’ve been absorbed in a drawing by Régamey of a diamond mine. At first sight it’s no different from one of those superficial drawings the illustrated magazines are full of — one is inclined to skip it — but if one looks at it for a moment everything becomes so beautiful and so curious that one is entirely won over. Régamey is clever. This print is by Félix, who often does the Japanese things.  My dear Theo, I had already been looking out for your letter, more or less, and was again glad of it. Thank you. I find what you write about the exhibition most interesting. What was that old painting by Dupré that you thought especially beautiful? You must write again to tell me. Your description of Troyon and Rousseau, for instance, is lively enough to give me some idea of which of their manners they are done in.  There were other paintings from the time of Troyon’s municipal pasture3 that had a certain mood that one would have to call dramatic, even though they aren’t figure paintings.  Israëls put it perfectly in the case of a Jules Dupré (Mesdag's large one):4 ‘It’s just like a figure painting’. It’s that dramatic quality that causes one to find a je ne sais quoi in it that makes one feel what you say, ‘It expresses that moment and that place in nature where one can go alone, without company.’  Ruisdael’s Bush6 has it strongly too.  Haven’t you ever seen old Jacques that were perhaps a little overdone, a little straining for effect — but not really — and for that reason were thought particularly beautiful, even though not everyone considered them to be among the finest Jacques?  Speaking of Rousseau, do you know Richard Wallace’s Rousseau? An edge of a wood in the autumn after rain, with a vista of meadows stretching away endlessly, marshy, with cows in them, the foreground rich in tone. To me that’s one of the finest — is very like the one with the red sun in the Luxembourg.  The dramatic effect of these paintings is something that helps us to understand ‘a corner of nature seen through a temperament’9 and that helps us understand that the principle of ‘man added to nature’10 is needed more than anything else in art, and one finds the same thing in Rembrandt’s portraits, for example — it’s more than nature, more like a revelation. And it seems good to me to respect that, and to keep quiet when it’s often said that it’s overdone or a manner.
   Oh, I must tell you that De Bock came round — very pleasant. Breitner, whom I didn’t in the least expect because he had apparently broken off contact completely some time ago, turned up yesterday. That pleased me because in the past — when I was first here — he was very pleasant to go walking with. I mean to go out together not in the country but in the city itself, to look for figures and nice scenes.  Here in The Hague there isn’t a single person I've ever done that with in the city itself; most think the city ugly and pass by all of it. And yet it’s really beautiful in the city sometimes, don’t you agree?  Yesterday, for example, I saw workmen in Noordeinde pulling down that part opposite the palace, chaps covered in white from the clouds of plaster dust with carts and horses. It was cool, windy weather, the sky grey, and there was great character in the scene. I saw Van der Velden once last year — at De Bock’s one evening when we looked at etchings. I’ve already written to you that he made a very favourable impression on me at the time, although he said little and wasn’t much company that evening. But the impression he immediately made on me was that he was a solid, genuine painter. It’s a square, Gothic head — something bold or daring, and yet gentle in his look. Very broad build, in fact the exact opposite of Breitner and De Bock. There’s something manly and strong in him, even if he says nothing and does nothing special. I do hope I’ll get in closer touch with him at some point, perhaps through Van der Weele.  Was at Van der Weele’s last Sunday; he was working on a painting of cows in the milking yard, for which he has several substantial studies. He’s moving to the country for some time.
   Of late I’ve done a few watercolours outdoors again for a change, a cornfield and a bit of a potato field. And also drawn a few small landscapes, to have something to go by for the settings of a few figure drawings that I’m looking for.   These are the designs of the figure drawings, very superficially. Above, weed burners, below, coming back from the potato field. I’m seriously considering painting a number of figure studies, mainly with a view to raising the standard of the drawings.
   It’s good news for me that you’re planning to come to Holland at the beginning of August, for I’ve said often enough that I dearly long to see you. I’m looking forward to hearing from you sometime as to how informed your woman is about art. In any event, much will have to be done and cultivated in that respect, I imagine. So much the better. In any case I hope she’ll get a sort of album, for which I hope you’ll find a few sheets among the smaller studies. Sometimes there are sheets in a sketchbook which still say something, even though they’re only scratches. I’ll gather one or two things together before you come.  Well, I’ve spoken to De Bock again and I can leave my stuff with him when I go to do studies in Scheveningen.  I also hope to go and see Blommers again soon. I talked to De Bock about his painting at the Salon, November, which I thought so beautiful, and the reproduction in the catalogue. He should still have a sketch of it, and I’d like to see it.  As for going to London sooner or later for a while, long or short, I too believe that there would be more chance of doing something with my work over there; I also think that I could learn a great deal if I could make the acquaintance of some people there. And there I wouldn’t be short of subjects to do, I assure you. There would be beautiful things to do on the wharves beside the Thames. Anyway, we must talk about various things again when you come. I hope you won’t be in too much of a hurry; we’ll have rather a lot to deal with. I’d like to be able to get some studies in Brabant again in the autumn.  Above all I’d like to have studies of a Brabant plough, of a weaver and of that village cemetery at Nuenen. Again, everything costs money. Well, regards, and thanks again for your letter and the enclosure. I wish you well. Do you think about bringing the woman to Holland, or is that not advisable as yet? I hope it happens. Adieu, old chap, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’m adding a word here to tell you something more about Breitner as well — since I’ve just come back from his temporary studio here (you know that he really lives in Rotterdam these days). You know Vierge or Urrabieta, the draughtsman for L’Illustration. Well, at times B. reminds me of Vierge, but very rarely.  When he’s good it looks like something done in haste by Vierge; but when he, that is B., is too hasty or doesn’t work things through, which is usually the case, it’s difficult to say what it resembles, for it looks like nothing — except like strips of an old, faded wallpaper from I don’t know which era, but in any event a very singular one, probably from long ago. Imagine, I go to the garret that he has at Siebenhaar’s. It was furnished mainly with various matchboxes (empty), and then with a razor or something, and a cupboard with a bed in it. I see something leaning against the chimney, 3 endlessly long strips that I at first think are sun blinds. But on closer inspection they turn out to be canvases in this format.  As you see from the above illustration, painted with a not unmystical scene, probably taken from Revelation, one would imagine at first sight.  Yet I’m informed that they are artillery manoeuvres in the dunes. Off the cuff I would put it at over 4 metres long by  3/4  of a metre.  The second was a story of a man who was leaning against the wall on the extreme left of the painting, while on the far right various types of ghostly women stood gawking at him, while care had been taken to leave a substantial space between these two groups. I was then informed that what was depicted in the left-hand corner was a drunkard, and I wouldn’t venture to doubt that this may just as well have been the maker’s intention as something else.
   The third is almost better, and is a sketch of the market that he did last year, but since then it seems it’s meant to depict a Spanish instead of a Dutch market, in so far as one can make anything of it.  Whatever merchandise is sold at the market (wherever it’s located, I for one doubt whether it’s meant to be on this earth; it’s much more likely to strike the naive beholder as portraying a scene on one of those planets visited by Jules Verne’s miraculous travellers (by projectile))25 – whatever merchandise really is being traded is impossible to make out, but it’s faintly reminiscent of a huge mass of preserves or sweets. You see, try to picture such a thing, but it couldn’t be more absurd, and heavy-handed as well, and you have the work of Friend Breitner.  From a distance they’re areas of faded colour as on bleached and rotting and mouldering wallpaper, and in that sense there are qualities in it that are absolutely unpalatable to me. I utterly fail to understand how anyone could possibly come up with something like that. It’s the sort of thing one sees when one has a fever — or impossible and meaningless as in a dream that makes no sense at all. I take the view, quite simply, that Breitner isn’t yet cured, and actually did it while he had a fever. Which, given his illness last year, may be considered entirely possible. Last year when I was cured but still couldn’t sleep and was feverish, I too had moments when I wanted to force myself to work all the same and did some things, though thank God not so absurdly big, and later on I couldn’t understand why I’d done them. This is why I think that B. will be all right in the end, but I find this absurd. 
   In a corner lay a crumpled watercolour study of some birches in the dunes27 that was much better and had nothing abnormal about it. But those big things are nothing.  I saw another one at Van der Weele’s, very ugly, and a head, very good, but a portrait of Van der W. — that he’d started — again bad.  So he’s making a terrible mess on a very big scale. I like the work of Hoffmann and Edgar Poe on occasion. (Contes fantastiques, Raven &c.)31 But I find this unpalatable because the fantasy is heavy-handed and without meaning, and there are almost no correspondences to what exists. I find it very ugly.  But I regard it as a period of illness. Van der Weele has two rather curious drawings by him, elegantly done in watercolour, which have a certain je ne sais quoi of what the English call ‘weird’. I learned a lesson today from that visit, namely that one can count oneself lucky if one is in relatively normal surroundings in today’s society, and doesn’t have to seek refuge in a coffee-house life which will make one begin to see things ever more cloudily and confusedly. For the latter is his situation, about that I have no doubt. Imperceptibly he has strayed terribly far from a calm, rational contemplation of things, and now he can’t put down a single calm, reasonable line or brushstroke as long as this stress continues.  I wish I could offer him some company and diversion, I wish I could often take a turn with him and perhaps make him a little calmer. You remember the painting The madness of Hugo van der Goes by Wauters? In some things B. faintly reminds me of a state of mind like Van der Goes’s. I’d not like to be the first to say this, but I believe his work has already been discussed in these terms for some considerable time.
   The remedy would be to look at length at the potato leaves that are so deep and elegant in colour and tone at present, instead of driving himself mad looking at lengths of yellow satin and pieces of gilt leather.  Anyway, we’ll see how it goes. He’s intelligent enough, but it’s a kind of bias towards eccentricity that he persists in regardless. If he deviated from the normal for a reasonable motive, well and good, but here it’s a question of not taking any trouble with his work either. I find it truly wretched and I hope he recovers, but he has lost his way badly. This week I’m going to start in Scheveningen. I would have liked there to be room for a little extra, then I would have bought some painting materials.  I’m going to have photographs taken of a few drawings in cabinet format33 or slightly larger (to see how they’d look on a small scale) by a photographer who has photographed those drawings by Ter Meulen, Du Chattel, Zilcken. He does it for 75 cents, that’s not expensive, is it? I’ll have the sower and the Peat diggers35 done for now, the one with many smaller figures, the other with 1 large figure. And if they work, later on when I have drawings I’ll be able to send you photos to show to Buhot, say, to see if he thinks he can place them. They could have the drawings themselves of the ones they want for reproduction or I can redraw them on their paper.  Regards again, Theo. Best wishes.  Do write again soon. I’ll have the photos taken, for we must stick to our guns with Buhot & Cie. I must try to earn a little so that I can make a start on something new and do some painting too, for I’m just in the mood for that.  Mauve not only had some unpleasantness with me36 but also, to give an example, had unpleasantness with Zilcken. It’s only now that I’ve seen Z.’s etchings, and just now photos of drawings by Zilcken at the photographer’s. Leaving myself out of it, I hereby declare that I don’t understand what M. has against Z. His drawings were good and not in the least bad; it’s capriciousness on Mauve’s part.  After all, I don’t think it very nice of C.M. that I haven’t received one syllable in reply to my letter, in which I took the trouble to do two croquis of the drawings in question. Nor do I think it nice of H.G.T. that he didn’t pay a call after I’d made an attempt to break the ice. It’s rubbish to say that he’s busy, because that’s not the reason in this case, he could find the time to come once a year. 
   I’m adding half a page to talk about Brabant. Among the figures of types from the people that I did there are several with a certain, what many would call old-fashioned, character, also in the approach. For example, a digger who’s more like those one sometimes finds in the bas-reliefs carved in wood on Gothic pews than a contemporary drawing. I very often think of the Brabant figures, which I find especially sympathetic. Something I’d like to have terribly much, and which I feel I can do, given certain conditions of patient posing, is the figure of Pa on a path on the heath, the figure severely drawn with character and, as I say, a stretch of brown heath with a narrow, white, sandy path running across it, and a sky applied with some passion and evenly expressed. Then, for instance, Pa and Ma arm in arm — in an autumn setting — or with a beech hedge with dry leaves.  I’d also like to have the figure of Pa when I do a country funeral, which I’m definitely planning, although it would be a great deal of trouble.  Leaving aside irrelevant differences in religious views, to me the figure of a poor village pastor is one of the most sympathetic in type and character that there is, and I wouldn’t be myself if I didn’t attack it sometime.  When you come I’d truly like to consult you on what to do about travelling over there. When you see my drawings of orphan men, for instance, you’ll understand what I want and how I mean it.
 0  My aim is to do a drawing that not exactly everyone will understand, the figure expressed in its essence in simplified form, with deliberate disregard of those details that aren’t part of the true character and are merely accidental. Thus it shouldn’t, for example, be the portrait of Pa but rather the type of a poor village pastor going to visit a sick person. The same with the couple arm in arm by the beech hedge — the type of a man and woman who have grown old together and in whom love and loyalty have remained, rather than portraits of Pa and Ma, although I hope they’ll pose for it. But they must know that it’s serious, which they might not see for themselves if the likeness isn’t exact. And should be a bit prepared, in the event that this happens, for having to pose as I say and not change anything. Well, that will be all right, and I don’t work so slowly as to make it a great effort for them. And for my part I would greatly value doing it. Simplifying the figures is something that very much preoccupies me. Anyway, you’ll see some for yourself among the figures I’ll show you. If I went to Brabant, it should certainly not be an excursion or pleasure trip, it seems to me, but a short period of very hard work at lightning speed. Speaking of expression in a figure, I’m becoming more and more persuaded that it lies not so much in the features as in the whole manner. I find few things as horrible as most academic facial expressions. I would rather look at ‘Night’ by Michelangelo, or a drunk by Daumier, or The diggers by Millet, and that large woodcut by him, The shepherdess. Or at an old horse by Mauve &c. My dear Theo, Before going to Scheveningen I wanted to have a brief word with you. I’ve confirmed with De Bock that I’ll have a pied-à-terre at his place. I may also drop in on Blommers now and again. And then my plan is to regard Scheveningen as absolutely the main thing for a while, going there in the morning and staying there for the day, or otherwise, if I must be at home, allocating that being at home to the afternoon when it’s too hot and then going back there in the evening. I’m sure this will give me new ideas, and rest, not through sitting still but through a change of surroundings and activity. Otherwise, I’m still deeply absorbed in work here. Had the Orphan man2 again today for something that suddenly occurred to me and that I wanted to press ahead with before beginning on something else. I must tell you that I’ve been to the orphanage again after all on a visiting day. That was when I saw the gardener and drew him from the window. Well, I didn’t want to let that go, and now I’ve got it down in roughly this form, as far as I can remember. 
    Yesterday evening I received a present that gave me enormous pleasure (from those two surveyors — for a second one has since joined in), namely a highly authentic Scheveningen jacket with a standing collar, picturesquely faded and patched.  I’ve sorted out my painting materials as far as was practicable, and replaced what I lacked and equipped myself with tram tickets &c. This morning I saw the negatives of three photos. I’m looking forward to the prints, and have hopes that in this small form they’ll be something with which we’ll be able to make approaches to 
   the illustrated magazines. I’m also considering having today’s gardener done as well, for that figure is much, much more detailed than in this scratch, and the setting isn’t as dull as here. I hope to be able to send you prints of the photos next week.  But, old chap, I would ask you to do your utmost to send me a little more, if at all possible, for I’m already broke because of one thing and another I absolutely had to have to be able to start in Scheveningen. It needn’t be very much, but just something to tide me over so that I’m not absolutely without a thing to drink in the dunes.  The photos are Sower, potato grubbers and Peat diggers; the last seemed to me to come out the best.  Don’t you think that was kind of the surveyors? They’re kind, cheerful fellows who’ve given me a lot of companionship.  They’re beginning to make really charming sketches, but are both about to take their 
   final examinations, one to be a surveyor and the other an engineer.  When I’ve got my bearings in Scheveningen I’ll bring the woman along now and then to pose, or at least to indicate the position and size of figures.  I long for you dearly, old chap, I hope there’ll be something in the work that will give you some pleasure and which you think shows some progress. Bock saw some painted studies from last year and thought they had something, but they please me less and less, I hope to do better ones this year. On Sunday the photographer8 is coming to the studio to talk about which of the figures I have would be best for photos.  I’ll be in no little difficulty if you absolutely cannot send anything extra. I’ve only taken what was definitely indispensable for the painting box, but have nonetheless been left with next to nothing.  The Scheveningen jacket is a nice surprise. I once wrote to you that things might turn out as they did years ago when I was also living in The Hague — that at first it would be a miserable time but become more agreeable later on. In many respects it has already become more pleasant and agreeable of late. Well, adieu, do what you can, and believe me, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent 
   Something I also wanted to say to you is that the figure studies for the large drawings are, in my view, much better than the drawings themselves.  That quite a large number of those figures are something that I at least have in my studio and, I believe, will continue to be of use in the year ahead. It isn’t that I’m dejected about the past year between your last visit and now, but if the income could have been a little more, we’d have made more progress with painting. 
   It’s a question of not losing heart and not weakening. I’ll have everything in order by the time you come so that we can regularly look through it easily. But make sure you spend a long time with me, brother.  When times are difficult we must give each other moral courage at the least, so that we don’t give up when trials come. And if we can preserve our serenity, there’s hope of achieving something good that stands firmly on its feet.
   In the company of other painters I try to appear offhand and not doubting for a moment.  If next year we can have painted studies, painted as steadily as the present ones are drawn steadily, then I think we can consider the battle won for the time being.  Until then it will be a close thing, and if we can muster some strength we’ll have to exert it to the utmost, and in no case can we have too much of it.  I think friend Rappard won’t be disinclined to give us a helping hand now and then. He told me recently that he had come back from my studio with new ideas — and I too from his12 — but the strength I can muster at the moment doesn’t amount to much.  Although I haven’t heard a syllable from C.M. in reply to my letter13 and croquis of Peat diggers14 and sand quarry, I’m not giving him up completely.
   Last year he was in a bad mood about the last consignment of drawings and wrote me a disagreeable note. To that I replied that Rappard had seen the same drawings and instead of thinking them inferior to my earlier ones he found them decidedly better. I was already ill at the time, and received C.M.’s reply in the hospital. He had looked at them again, yes, there were good things in them and when I had something else we would see. But I didn’t want to take him up on that right away, until now. His not wanting to have any contact now must be due to things he has heard about ‘misconduct’, that I live with a woman and children without being married. For a time C.M. also wanted little to do with Franken, his own brother-in-law, for similar reasons; I know because I was once walking in Paris with C.M. and he said to me ‘that’s where my brother-in-law lives but I can’t go there because he lives with “a low woman”.’17 However, I’ve deliberately kept C.M. in reserve for just such an emergency, and I think it might be good if you were to show him some of the best studies and say to him plainly that there’s hope of victory if we can only get some more rope and persevere, and that I’m not just asking for money but, in accordance with our first agreement last year, would like him to give me money for studies which I myself would be very glad to buy back from him later, or exchange for a watercolour or painting.  In fact, I also have a certain promise from Uncle Cent that he would take drawings from me, but I’ve never spoken to him about it again, and it’s two years ago now. My dear Theo, I thank you for your letter, and for the enclosure, although I can’t suppress a feeling of sadness over what you say, ‘as for the future, I can give you little hope’. If you mean that only in relation to financial matters, I wouldn’t be downcast, but if I’m to take it as applying to my work, I really don’t see how I deserve that. It just so happens that I can now send you the prints of photos after a few of my recent drawings, which I promised you earlier but couldn’t manage because I was flat broke.  I don’t know how you intended those words, nor can I know. Your letter is too brief, but it gave me an unexpected blow right in the chest.  But I would like to know what the position is, whether you noticed something in me, that I wasn’t making progress or something.  As for financial matters, you’ll remember writing to me months ago about bad times. My answer was: very well, a reason for us to do our very best on both sides; see that you send me the absolutely essential, I’ll get on with making more progress so that perhaps we can place something with the illustrated magazines. I’ve since made a start on various large compositions in which there was more of a subject than in studies of single figures. 
   So now my first consignment of photos to be shown to someone or other if needed coincides with your ‘as for the future, I can give you little hope’. Is there something in particular???  I’m rather nervous about this. You must write again soon. Well, as you see, the photos are Sower — potato grubbers — Peat diggers. I’ve now done some more, Sand quarry, weed burners, Dung-heap, Potato grubber 1 figure, Coal loaders, and at Scheveningen this week I worked on Mending nets (Scheveningen fishermen’s wives).  And two larger compositions of Dune workers8 (one of which I showed to Tersteeg again) which, although they’ll require a lot more labour, are still what I’d most like to complete.  Long rows of diggers — poor fellows set to work by the city — in front of a piece of dune land that’s to be dug over. But to do that is terribly difficult.  Peat diggers gives you a first idea of it. I wouldn’t be so melancholy about it, brother, if you hadn’t added something that worries me. You say ‘let’s hope for better times’.
   You see, that’s one of the things one must be careful about, in my view. Hoping for better times mustn’t be a feeling but a doing something in the present. My doing depends on your doing, in the sense that if you were to reduce what you send I couldn’t go on and would be desperate.  Precisely because I felt the hope of better times alive within me, I continued to throw myself into it with all my strength — into the work of THE ‘PRESENT’ — without thinking about that future other than to trust that work would bring its reward, although the spending on food, drink, clothes had to be reduced again and again, week after week, more and more. I was faced by the question of going to Scheveningen, the question of painting. I thought: come, press ahead. But now I wish I hadn’t begun, old chap, for it means extra expenses and I don’t have it. The weeks passed, many, many weeks and months of late, when each time the expenses were slightly more than I could keep up with, even with all the fretting and worrying and economizing. So when the money arrives from you, not only do I have to manage on it for 10 days but I immediately have to pay out so much that in those 10 days that lie ahead one couldn’t be in a more meagre situation from the outset. And the woman must breastfeed the child, and the child is strong and growing, and she’s often worried because there’s no milk.
   I, too, have an enormous feeling of faintness at times in the dunes or elsewhere, because there’s nothing coming in.  Everyone’s shoes patched and worn out and other petty vexations10 that give one wrinkles. Anyway — it would be nothing, Theo, if only I could hold on to the thought: it will work all the same, just press on. But now to me your words ‘as for the future, I can give you little hope’ are like ‘the hair that breaks the camel’s back at last’. The burden is sometimes so heavy that one hair more makes the animal fall to the ground. Well, what to do? I’ve seen and spoken to Blommers twice already in Scheveningen, and he saw a few things of mine and asked me to call on him sometime.  I did some painted studies there, a bit of sea, a potato field, a field with women mending nets, and here at home a chap in the potato field planting cabbage in the empty spaces between the potato leaves, and then I’m working on the large drawing of beeting the nets, as they call it. But I feel my enjoyment fading, one needs a fixed point somewhere. You see, the fact that you say to me, just have hope for the future, is as if you yourself no longer have any hope for me. Is that so? I can’t help it, I feel unwell because of the worry, and I just wish you were here.
   You say that the effect of the autographs13 is rather meagre. That doesn’t surprise me in the least when I consider that someone’s physical state influences his work, and my life is too dry and too meagre. Honestly, Theo, for the sake of the work we ought to have eaten a little better, but we couldn’t afford it and things will stay like that if I don’t get a little more leeway by one means or another. So do show the photos to Buhot or someone if you can’t arrange it yourself, and try to find a market through him, if you can.  I almost regret starting to paint again, for if I can’t make any progress I would rather I had given it up. It can’t be done without paint, and paint is dear, and because I still owe Leurs and Stam some money I can’t run up a bill. And I like painting so much. Now that I was doing it again I took more pleasure in things from last year, and have hung painted things in the studio again. The sea, which I love very dearly, needs to be attacked with painting, otherwise one has no grip on it.
   Look, Theo, I just hope that you aren’t losing heart, but truly, if you’re going to talk about ‘giving no hope for the future’ then I feel sad, for you must have the courage and the energy to send, otherwise I’ll be stuck and powerless to move forward, for those who could be friends have become hostile, and appear to want to stay like that.  Consider the fact that, after all, I’ve done nothing that could justify this, at any rate not explain why Mauve, say, or Tersteeg or C.M. are so cool as not to want to see anything or say a word. I find it human that a coolness may arise over one thing or another, but to maintain the coolness now that more than a year has passed, and after repeated attempts at reconciliation, is not kind.
   Thus I end for today with the question, Theo, when in the beginning you spoke to me about painting, and if we could have foreseen then the work now, would we have hesitated to think it was right that I should become a painter (or draughtsman then, what difference does it make?)? I don’t believe that we’d have hesitated to press ahead if we could have foreseen these photos, for instance, would we?, for a painter’s hand and eye are needed after all if one wants to create such a scene in the dunes in one form or another. But now I often feel so wretched when I see people remaining so apathetic and cold that I lose heart. Well, then I recover again and go back to work and smile about it, and because I work in the present and don’t let a day go by 
   without working, I believe that I do indeed have hope for the future, although it doesn’t feel like that because, as I say, there’s no room left in my brain for philosophizing about the future, either to upset me or to console me. Holding on to the present and not letting it pass by without managing to get something out of it — now that’s what I believe duty is. So you should also try to hold on to the present with respect to me, and let’s persevere with what we can persevere with, preferably today rather than tomorrow. But you needn’t spare me, Theo, if it’s just a question of money, and if you, as friend and brother, retain some sympathy for the work, saleable or unsaleable. As long as that’s the case, that I still retain your sympathy in this respect, then it matters precious little to me, and we must confer calmly and coolly. Then, if there’s no hope for the future financially, I would propose a move to the country, saving half the rent in a village deep in the country, and for the same amount of money that one pays here for bad food getting good, healthy food, which is needed for the woman and the little ones, and for me too in fact. Also having advantages perhaps for models.
   As you know, last summer I painted — now I’ve hung up several studies again, because when I was doing new ones I saw that there was something in them after all. Painting helped me indirectly with my drawing during the winter months and the spring, and I worked that up right until these recent drawings. Now, though, I feel it would be good to paint again for a while, and I need that to become richer in tone, in the drawings too. I had planned to paint the women sitting in the grass mending the nets in a fairly large format, but after what you said I’ll wait until I’ve spoken to you.  I’ve received small prints of the autographs, but weak ones, yet the man tells me16 he ought really to have put on more ink and that he’ll give me better ones. No matter, I’ve experimented with doing a croquis in a small format as if for an illustrated magazine. Oh, Theo, I could make much more progress if I was a little better off.  But I can’t think of a way out, I come up against expenses on all sides. When I read the life story of one painter or another, I see that in fact they all needed money, and were miserable when they couldn’t carry on.  Write soon, for I’m not well and in two minds as to whether I dare go ahead with Scheveningen, which will involve the costs of painting materials.
 0  I had hoped that you would have been able to send something — well, in any event, especially if you have no money, you must write to me soon, for it’s quite a feat to keep one’s spirits up in the circumstances. I think the drawings from which the photos have been taken aren’t yet deep enough in tone, not yet depicting the emotion nature evokes sufficiently, but if you compare this with what I began with, the earlier figures, I believe I’m not mistaken in seeing signs of progress and we mustn’t let go of that advance, so let us toil on.  I wish you could come. Write soon in any case. Adieu, with a handshake.  Ever yours, Vincent I don’t think it right, Theo, to spend more than one receives — but if it’s a question of stopping or carrying on working, I’m for carrying on to the end. Millet and other predecessors carried on right up to the bailiff, and some went to prison or had to move hither and thither, yet I don’t see in them that they stopped. And with me it’s still only the beginning, but I see it in the distance like a dark shadow, and it sometimes makes working sombre.  I’ve spoken to Breitner again, about those three compositions in progress. It was indeed so that he had done them in a moment when he was out of sorts. He told me that he regretted doing them like that, and showed me an altered composition of the drunkard and studies of low street women19 that were infinitely better. And I also saw some watercolours in the making and a painting of a farrier’s20 that were done with a calmer and more correct hand and head. I read a book he lent me, Soeur Philomène by De Goncourt, who wrote Gavarni. The story is set in a hospital, very good. Sunday evening. Dear brother, Whether it’s fever or nerves or something else I don’t know — but I don’t feel well. I think of that remark in your letter1 in connection with various things, more than necessary I hope, and have an uneasy feeling I can’t shake off, although I’ve tried to distract myself.  There’s nothing wrong, or is there? If there is something, say frankly what kind of obstacles are in the offing. Write in any case, if possible by return of post, and say whether or not there is something. I can’t help it if it has no cause, but I’ve suddenly fallen ill; it may be a reaction to my having over-exerted myself.  Write to me in any case, old chap. Did you get the photos? I’m going for a walk to see if it clears up. Regards and Ever yours, Vincent I don’t really have any friends except for you, and when I’m ill you’re always in my thoughts. I wish you were here and we could confer again about a move to the country.  Apart from what I’ve already written, there’s nothing particular wrong with me and things carry on as normal — but I may have caught a chronic fever or something, and have suddenly fallen ill. 
   I’ve had to pay out left and right again: landlord, paint, baker, grocer, cobbler, I don’t know what else, and what’s left isn’t much. Anyway, the worst thing is that after many weeks like that one sometimes feels the strength to bear things diminishing, and begins to feel a general fatigue.  Even if you have nothing to send immediately, brother, make sure in any event that you write to me, if you can, by return of post. And as for that future, if there’s something wrong, don’t be afraid to say so, forewarned is forearmed, it’s better to know exactly what one will be fighting against.  I did do some work today, but I was overcome all at once by a malaise in my very marrow, and I don’t exactly know what to attribute it to.  At such moments one would like to be made of iron and hates being only flesh and blood. I wrote to you early this morning, but when I had posted my letter it was just as if suddenly all the trouble I had had with one thing and another gathered itself together and it was too much for me, because I could no longer comprehend the future.
   Otherwise I cannot say — cannot understand — why the work shouldn’t be making progress.  I’ve set my whole heart on it, and that seemed to me a mistake, at least for the moment.  Still, old chap, you know yourself, on what (in practice, in real life), to what should one give one’s strength and one’s thoughts and mental powers? One must have a stab at it and say, I’ll do something and carry it through. Now and then it may turn out wrong and one may come up against a wall if people don’t want to have it, but still one needn’t take it to heart, need one? I don’t believe that one should make oneself ill over it, but sometimes it becomes too much for someone and one falls ill, even though one would rather not. Now I thought that I was sorry that I didn’t get ill and give up the ghost somewhere in the Borinage years ago instead of painting. For I’m just a burden to you and I can’t help it, for one must go through many periods to become good, and in the meantime what one produces isn’t bad because of that if one does one’s best, but there ought to be people who viewed it in its context and direction and aim, and didn’t make demands. I don’t know what they really want.
   Things look black to me now. If only I was alone, but it’s the thought of the woman and the children, those poor lambs, whom one would like to keep safe and for whom one feels responsible. The woman has been doing well recently. I can’t discuss it with them, but I myself found it too frightening today. All one can do is work; if that doesn’t help one is at one’s wits’ end.  And you see, the thing is that the possibility of working depends on getting the work placed, for one has expenses — the more one works the more the expenses (although not in all respects). Not getting it placed — if there’s no other income — makes progress impossible that would otherwise follow naturally. In short, old chap, I’m more anxious about it than I can bear, about the general state of affairs, and I’m letting you know my thoughts. I wish you would come soon.  Anyway, above all write soon, for I have need of it. Naturally, I can’t talk about things with anyone else as I do with you, for others have no involvement and are outsiders.
   All things considered, what it will come down to is that we continue to understand each other well and keep our friendship warm. Then if misfortune comes, we’ll defy it but, brother, let’s remain true to each other.  I gain everything, for without you I wouldn’t have been able to carry on to where we are now; you gain nothing except for the feeling of giving a career to someone who would have had no career otherwise.  And later, who knows what we can produce together in this way? A period of some struggling on will be required to get the painting right, but when you see the studies I believe you’ll see that it isn’t foolishness.  The reason I write to you so often now about the shortage of money is that the situation is desperate. One mustn’t become too weak physically and not have been too emotionally hurt. And if things get too bad and too hot to bear, it’s one’s duty to look around and see if one can alleviate the circumstances somewhat.
   I would see less of a problem in the future if I were less awkward in dealing with people. Finding buyers if I’m without you is impossible, so to speak, and with you it’s gradually becoming possible. And if we do our absolute best it will stay on its feet and not founder, but we must stay together.  I feel a need for us to see each other again and together see which way the work should go. I talk to De Bock and other painters sometimes, but I don’t talk about things as if I trusted them completely, and there are many things they don’t need to know. Of course I don’t talk about things like that small incident this morning, but encountering a lot of unpleasantness from outside makes one feel a need to forget everything for once by talking to someone who understands things fully and is sympathetic. The everyday reality for me is to keep things to myself and get by through being offhand. But the everyday isn’t enough if one has some feeling, and one seeks true friendship and trust. It’s precisely because my constitution begins to give way at times and I feel the strength to bear things diminishing that I say to you frankly that I sometimes have a need to be with you quietly and to see each other. This year I had a battle to carry on in the studio; sometimes it was terribly difficult to go on working. And I must renew my strength.  And write now if at all possible — and that must be possible — one more time in the interval that must pass before we see each other again. I must keep on working, and there’s a feeling of weariness that overwhelms me time and again, a general weakness that’s a reaction to exertion and keeps recurring, but which I must do something about or it will get worse. I wouldn’t say this to De Bock or someone like that — but I trust you enough to say it. It’s not a question of losing heart or giving something up, but of having expended more strength than one should and of having more or less exhausted one’s powers. Dear brother, I’ve had an anxious and uneasy feeling since writing to you yesterday, and last night it kept me awake.  It is: will I be able to go on or will I not be able to go on? That, in a nutshell, is what I’m fretting about. You now have the photos1 so far, and you’ll be able to picture my state of mind more accurately with them in front of you than before you had them. To me, the drawings I’m doing now are a shadow of what I mean, but a shadow that already has a certain shape, and what I seek, what I’m after, isn’t something vague but things from full reality that can only be mastered by patient and regular work.  Look, imagining how I would have to work in fits and starts is a ghastly prospect for me. No one can work without money, and it seems to me advisable to work with as little as possible, yet anyone would feel weighed down and melancholy at the thought of stopping or going short of what one absolutely needs. Oh Theo, the work involves trouble and setbacks, but what is that compared with the misery that looms if someone leads a life without activity?  So don’t lose courage, and we must try to make each other’s heart strong instead of weak or upset.  I’ve talked to Blommers about painting. He wants me to carry on; I myself also feel that after having done these 10 or 12 large drawings I’m now at a point where I must change my manner rather than do more in the same vein.
   What I wrote to you about (and about which you also wrote, our thoughts have crossed again), the meagreness or what they call the dryness is what must be overcome each day anew, and mustn’t become a chronic defect.  See, again I find it remarkable that you and I really seem to have thought the same thing again, for when you wrote just a brief word about it, that’s what immediately catches the eye in the two autographs. And in the photos too.  It seems to me that one thing and another wouldn’t be so bad if it weren’t for that defect. For my part I’ve constantly felt it myself while doing drawings, and thought about it a great deal, and I wrote to you about it precisely because it was urgent. I’ve thought about causes and ways of overcoming it, and see no other way than to revive my capacity for work, and also to work a little on my constitution, since it’s taking a turn that isn’t for the best. I absolutely must have some money, and must restore both my constitution and my painting box, otherwise I fear that things will crop up later that will be more difficult to put right. This is the beginning — the most recent drawings are less dry here and there than earlier ones. If it were the case, Theo, that I could get some help and sympathy somewhere in some way, I think that 
   would cheer things up soon enough. I could show you a similar moment of dryness in the history of many who have completely overcome it.  I don’t want to give any examples, because you yourself will find several once you give it some thought. But there’s one thing — nearly all the people who got through the Ecole de Rome, and had that period of ceaselessly grinding away at the figure, come up at the end of the course with rather clever, rather meticulously drawn things which, however, aren’t pleasing to see because there’s something of a soul in need4 about them, something they lose later when they feel a little freer and can move.  Now I don’t consider myself as clever in my drawings as those fellows; all the same, without being compelled by any particular course, I gave myself the task of studying the figure with perseverance for the sake of raising the level of my drawing. And precisely because of that effort, because of that over-exertion, I ended up in that dryness.  Again, it would be good if I could get a little more leeway, not for the sake of my pleasure or convenience but for the sake of the order and the progress of the work.
   There’s no question of resting, but I believe that finding a diversion by changing the manner of work and the subjects would be a good thing.  After the figure studies I feel a need to look at length at things like the sea, the bronze potato leaves, stubble fields or ploughed earth.  So as to gain time I haven’t spared myself, I’ve stinted myself of everything as long as I could carry on working, but now I can get little more out of myself, can’t draw any more on my own basic needs, on that side there’s nothing more to be squeezed out, there is leanness and dryness.  Consider whether it’s understandable that I have grave doubts when I imagine the income being reduced while we’re already beginning to be in need.  I wish you could come soon.  Now I had hoped that perhaps a few of the 10 or 12 drawings could be placed, but that too has fallen through. Still, after all, whatever may come, I hope not to restrain myself weakly, and have hope that a certain fever and fury of work will carry me through it if it comes to the worst, as a boat can be hurled over a reef or a sandbank by the swell and can take advantage of the storm not to founder. Yet such manoeuvres don’t always work, and it would be desirable to sail round the spot by tacking. After all, if it fails, what is lost in me? I’m not that attached to it anyway. But generally one tries to have life bear fruit instead of just letting it wither, and thinks at times that one also has a life oneself that isn’t indifferent to how it’s treated. But it’s out of my hands. If I don’t have a little extra on occasion, I have to pay out so much each time when I receive the normal amount that not much is left for the 10 days that lie ahead, on the last of which one walks along the road with a very weak and faint feeling in the stomach. And then one of those sandy roads in the dunes begins to resemble a desert. And one feels oneself sinking and can’t have or can’t pay for necessary things. And then the inner conflict: will I be able to persevere in that way and carry on, or where am I going, what can be done? In any case write soon as to whether you see anything in the photos. You don’t find something absurd in them, do you?, as one might well conclude from Tersteeg’s ‘that he would rather stay out of it completely’? I’m too calm and cool-headed for that, after all. Adieu, a firm handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent When you read this letter, in connection with the photos sent, I believe you’ll see that I myself see the weak side of the drawings and see ways of counteracting that weakness, and certainly don’t refuse to work to overcome it, but am also faced by the question of how to obtain what I would need for that. I don’t regard the fact that I don’t have it as being your fault, though, but it isn’t mine either, and what to do — what to do? My dear Theo, Coming home from Scheveningen just now, I found your letter, for which many thanks.  Many things in it give me pleasure. In the first place I’m glad that dark passages in the future can’t change our friendship in any way nor have anything to do with it. I’m also glad that you’re coming soon — and that you detect progress in the work. The division of your income, directly and indirectly, among no fewer than 6 people is indeed remarkable. But the subdivision of my 150 francs among 4 living beings, while all the expenses for models, drawing materials, painting requisites and rent must be paid from them, also makes one think, don’t you agree? It would be a splendid thing if we could raise those 150 francs from the work in the coming year — I take your visit as marking its start. We must confer about this. It’s a pity that I haven’t got a little further with painting, I must explain that again from the beginning. When you were here last summer, I had money from you to enable me to make a big effort. From that I had to pay Stam and Leurs, and I made some extra purchases and paid for them immediately and started work. Then, in addition, you wrote some time later that you were going to have some money coming in and that then ‘there’d be no lack of paint in the painting box’. But that was not to be, for if you remember from that time on you yourself weren’t without your reverses. Nonetheless, at the beginning of the winter, or rather at the end of the autumn, I again received a little extra. Money for Leurs again had to be deducted from that; I’d painted on those autumn days, including when we had storms on Scheveningen. We were then facing the winter and I thought it inadvisable to involve myself in new expenses, given the higher spending on fuel &c., since little of the extra amount was left. Well, I then took lots of models again, and the period from then until recent days has most certainly been one in which I feel I’ve made progress with the figure.  But when making these figure studies it was absolutely impossible to buy paint or to do watercolours. For if you think back, you will remember how you thought you would be able to send several times, but it wasn’t possible, first you thought in March, but before that you had to withdraw money yourself. 
   And had to take care of the woman and had the matter with H. van G., and later business was rather at a standstill.  Well, I still wanted to do it sometimes if I thought there was any chance of managing it. Rappard advanced me some money, I had a little extra from Pa. But what happens? — like the May bug tied to a string, which can fly a little way but then comes up against something fatal.  I started things but as soon as the month ended I had to bend over backwards for weeks to pay the bill, sometimes almost unbearably hard up. So I wasn’t always able to do what I wanted and want to do in my heart.  Still, not disheartened, we must hammer away at it again. I’ve just brought back some studies for seascapes6 that could serve as the basis for watercolours like the very small one of the last visitors that I once sent you in a letter. We’ll do our best, but these are certainly difficult times.  What I had just started on, which is actually more pressing than anything else, is painting figure studies, but I’m baffled as to how to pay for it.  I had the studio altered as well. The position is that I myself have long lived on hope.  But you’re coming soon — that’s a good thing — at any rate you’ll then see what I still have here — and will see that I haven’t been idle.  I must, however, make sure I get my strength up, for if I recover some of that it’ll be high time to use it. 
   For my strength has disappeared; it isn’t normal for me to be tired after a short walk, such as from here to the post, but that’s how it is at present. Oh, I carry on of course, but I must do something about it.  My health doesn’t suffer (fundamentally or chronically) due to excesses, but due to a long period of too little or too insubstantial food.  Well, the urgent thing for making progress this year will be that there must be painting. Now I again ask you to consider something that I wrote about briefly last year8 but which I believe has slipped your mind. Here I have to pay the retail price for paint &c.  Wouldn’t it be possible for you to get hold of paint from Paillard or someone like that in a certain quantity at the net price first hand, thus from the maker himself?  That would certainly be a step closer to having no lack of paint. And I’d be very glad if we could make an arrangement whereby you held back, say, 10 francs each time you sent. That makes 30 francs a month, 90 every three months, and I wouldn’t bother you for a few tubes each time but, if I had the net price list, say what was needed for 3 months. Could you give this some thought? I believe it would be a good measure. Whether it’s Paillard or Bourgeois9 or whoever isn’t important. As a dealer you’re probably eligible to buy at net prices.
   I planned to speak to someone about supplying me with paint at net prices, but now that I’ve raised the subject I hear from him that he can’t do so.  You must see to it that you come soon, brother, for I don’t know how long I can keep it up. Things are a little too much for me, I feel that I’m giving way under them.  I tell you frankly that I’m beginning to fear I shan’t get through in this way, for my constitution would be good enough if I hadn’t had to fast for a long time, but again and again it was a question of either fasting or working less, and as far as possible I chose the first, so that now I’m too weak. How to endure that? I see the effects so clearly and distinctly in my work that I get worried about how to move forwards. You mustn’t say anything about this, brother, for if certain persons12 knew such a thing it would be: oh, see, we foresaw and foretold that long in advance, and not only would they still not help me but they’d also cut me off from the possibility of patiently regaining my strength and recovering.  Given my present circumstances my work can’t be other than it is. If I can overcome my physical weakness, we’ll try to make progress; I’ve already postponed and postponed getting my strength back because I have to take care of others and of the work. But now I’m at my wits’ end. Progress in the work isn’t to be expected before I’m stronger; it has become all too clear to me of late that my physical condition has an influence on it.  I assure you that it’s NOTHING other than a weakening due to exertion and poor nourishment. Some who have talked about me on occasion as if I had some kind of complaint would start all over again, and that is gossip that’s very ugly, and so keep it to yourself without saying anything about it when you come here. But the dryness in the work is largely beyond my control, and will change if I can get back on my feet.  What I long for most is your coming, and for us to go through the work together and see each other again.  Regards, and in the meantime see that you write more often now and again, for I have need of it. And thanks for this last letter, mind — I wish you the very best.  It will no doubt be a question of having to fast again for the coming days until your letter arrives, write as soon as you possibly can.  My dear Theo, A man comes to me this morning who had repaired the lamp for me 3 weeks ago, and from whom at the same time I bought some earthenware that he himself pressed me to take.  He came to tell me off because I had just paid his neighbour but not him. Accompanied by a lot of noise, swearing, ranting &c. I tell him I’ll pay him as soon as I receive money but that I don’t have it at the moment, and that adds fuel to the flames. I ask him to leave, and in the end I push him out of the door but, perhaps deliberately letting things get to this point, he grabs me by the neck and throws me against the wall and then flat on the floor. You see, this is the sort of thing from which you can see the petty vexations3 one is faced with. A chap like that is stronger than I am, right? — they aren’t at all ashamed. Well, all the small shopkeepers &c. one deals with for daily necessities belong to the same type. They come themselves to ask you to take this or that from them or, if one goes to someone else, they ask for your custom, but if one must unfortunately put off payment for longer than a week it’s cursing and scolding. Anyway, that’s the way they are, and what can one say? They themselves are sometimes hard pressed. I’m telling you about this to show you that it’s rather urgent that I make some money if possible. When I went to Scheveningen I had to leave one or two others waiting. I’m a little worried, brother, and have considerable sorrow and difficulty. I long for you to come because I want to decide whether or not I should move. To carry on here I would need to earn a bit more in general; the little that I lack makes life here unbearable.  Otherwise, I have so few setbacks in the work that all the petty vexations don’t affect my pleasure in it and don’t prevent me doing one thing and another. 
   There are a couple of small seascapes at De Bock’s, one with a choppy, one with a calm sea, a genre I’d very much enjoy pursuing. Yesterday a peasant cottage with a red roof under tall trees. Well, I believe that painting figure studies would help me with many things, I made a start with one boy in the potato field and one in the garden by a cane fence. I ought to be able to put some effort into them.  The incident this morning is a sign to me that it’s a duty to confer and to take a smaller place in a village if there’s no hope of being a little better off here. Otherwise, the studio here is practical enough, and there’s no lack of beautiful subjects to do here. And it isn’t everywhere that one has the sea.  What I said to you about not feeling strong is true, it has now come down to pain between the shoulders and in the lumbar vertebra, which I’ve had before from time to time, but I know from experience that one must then be careful, otherwise one gets too weak and can’t easily recover.  I’m relatively resigned to things. Circumstances have been a little too much for me recently, and my plan to win back old friends by working constantly and sensibly has been shattered. Theo, there’s one thing that it would be good for us to discuss at some point — I’m not saying that there’s any question of this right now, but the days could become darker still and I would like us to agree on this for that eventuality. My studies and everything in the way of work in the studio is definitely your property. The question doesn’t arise now — I repeat — but in due course, for instance because of unpaid tax, the things may be sold, and in that case I would like to put the work in a safe place and out of the house. It’s my studies that I can hardly do without for later work, things that have taken me a great deal of trouble to do.
   So far there hasn’t been a soul here in the street who pays tax, yet all have been assessed for various sums, including me, and I have twice had appraisers here; I drew their attention, however, to my 4 kitchen chairs and unpainted table and said I wasn’t eligible to be assessed for so much. That if they found carpets, pianos, antiques &c. at a painter’s, they might not be wrong to assess such a man as being able to pay, but that I couldn’t even pay my paint bill, and that there were no luxury items but only children in my house, and that consequently there was nothing to be had from me. They then sent me demands and final notices but I ignored all that and said, when they came back again, that it was pointless because I simply lit my pipe with them. That I didn’t have it, and my 4 chairs, table &c. wouldn’t raise anything anyway. That they weren’t worth as much new as they wanted to assess me for.  They have indeed left me in peace since, for months now. And other people here in the street aren’t paying either.  Still, now that we’re talking about this, I wish I knew where to store my studies in such an event. Well, I could take them to Van der Weele, say, or someone. Together with my tools. I always have a certain hope that when you come to the studio sometime you will yet find things in which someone might possibly be interested, even though they have no particular commercial value.  There’s no lack of work.  Despite everything, at heart I don’t have a feeling of dejection, and on the contrary I can agree with what I read recently in Zola, ‘If at present I’m worth something, it’s because I am alone and because I hate the ninnies, the incapable, the cynics, the idiotic and foolish mockers’. But none of that can perhaps 
   do away with the fact that I can’t withstand the siege if I stay here. I write about this very matter because it’s at the beginning, and the manoeuvre of moving to a cheaper place may perhaps be the solution, although it’s very urgent in itself purely for the sake of spending less on accommodation.  Van der Weele has the silver medal for his painting that he more than deserves, I’m glad he has got it.  I’ve thought a good deal about that painting by Van der W. because I saw it being done in part, and talked quite a lot about it with him and was immediately attracted by it.  I believe, Theo, that I too could do something like that through carrying on working regularly and calmly in the future.  But in any event, there would have to be a period of constant painting in between, and for that there would have to be means, and at present the prospect of getting them seems to me slight. Van der Weele has managed it by sacrificing half of his time on things he doesn’t do for pleasure but through which he raises the means to keep his painting box filled and to eat &c. Perhaps, perhaps, if there were to be some article in my work that people wanted to have, I might be able to pull it off too. Otherwise I don’t care much about selling in itself, other than as a means of being able to keep going. I tell you plainly that few of the ideas about art with which I became familiar during my time with Goupil11 — in so far as they had to do with practice — have been borne out, although I’ve kept the same taste. Creating things doesn’t take place as one imagines if one is a dealer, and the life of a painter is different, the study is different. I would find it hard to say in what sense, but  Daubigny’s words, ‘my paintings that I value more highly aren’t the ones that bring in the most’12 are something I now believe, and if I’d heard them when I was with G&Cie, I would have thought he was just saying that as a manner of speaking. Adieu, old chap — I’m a little worried, you can see from what I’ve written about my skirmish this morning that people don’t treat me with much consideration. They’d probably keep their distance more if one wore a top hat and I don’t know what else besides. One has one’s sense of things after all, and it isn’t pleasant. Anyway, I wish there was something to be found in the work so that a little more leeway would be possible. Adieu, write soon, I long for that so much. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, To my surprise another letter from you arrived yesterday with a banknote enclosed. I don’t need to tell you that I was glad of it, and truly thank you for it. They refused to change the note, though, on the grounds that it was too torn. But I got 10 guilders on it and it has been sent to Paris. If the bank refuses it, I’ll have to return the 10 guilders, for which I had to sign a receipt, but if the bank changes it I’ll get the rest later.  What you write in your letter about the conflict one can have over the question of whether one is accountable for the unfortunate consequences of a good deed — whether one wouldn’t do better to act in a way which one knows isn’t good but which will allow one to come out of it without mishaps — that conflict is familiar to me too.  If one follows one’s conscience — for me conscience is the very highest form of reason — the reason within the reason — one is tempted to think one has acted wrongly or foolishly, one gets particularly upset if more superficial people are amused by thinking they’re so much wiser and are so much better at getting where they want. Yes, then it’s sometimes difficult, and if conditions are such that the difficulties rise to a spring flood, one can be led to regret that one is as one is and wish one had been less conscientious. I hope that you don’t picture me in any other way than as constantly waging the same inner battle, and also often having tired brains, and in many cases also being unable to decide questions of whether it would be better or worse to do this or that.  While I’m working I feel an unlimited confidence in art and that I’ll succeed, but on days of physical exhaustion or when there are financial obstacles I feel that faith less and am overcome by doubt, which I try to get over by immediately setting to work.  And it’s just like that with the woman and the children. When I’m with them and the little fellow comes crawling towards me on hands and knees, crowing with delight, I haven’t the slightest doubt that it’s all right.
   That child has very often calmed me down.  When I’m at home he can’t be kept away from me; if I’m working he comes up to tug at my jacket or works his way up my leg until I take him on my lap. In the studio he crows at everything, sits playing silently with a piece of paper for hours, a bit of string or an old brush. He’s a child who is almost always cheerful; if he manages to keep that up all his life he’ll be cleverer than I am.  Well, what to say about such matters as that there are times when one feels that there’s a certain fatality that makes the good work out wrong and the wrong good? I believe one has the right to regard those thoughts as the consequence, in part, of stress and if one has them one shouldn’t make it a duty to believe things are indeed as black as one then thinks but, because if one were to worry about it one would go mad, on the contrary, it’s reasonable to strengthen oneself physically in that case, and really set to work when that has been done, and if that doesn’t help continue nonetheless with these two remedies and regard it as something fatal if that melancholy persists. In time one will gain in strength of mind and carry on with life. There remain imponderables, there remains sorrow2 or melancholy, but against that eternally negative there’s the positive of the work that one nonetheless gets done in this way. If life were as simple and things actually worked as in the story of dutiful Hendrik3 or an ordinary, routine sermon by a minister, it wouldn’t be all that hard to find one’s way. But the fact is they aren’t like that, they’re infinitely more complicated, and good and evil no more occur by themselves than black and white do in nature.  Now one must take care not to relapse into opaque black — into definite badness — and still more 
   must one avoid the white of a whitewashed wall, which is hypocrisy and the eternal Pharisaism. Whoever bravely tries to follow reason and above all conscience, the very highest reason, the sublime reason, and tries to put being honest into practice, is unlikely to go completely astray, I believe, although one won’t succeed without mistakes and banging one’s head and weaknesses, and won’t achieve perfection. And this will give rise to a deep sense of compassion and courtesy, I believe, broader than that measured quality that the ministers have made their speciality.  So one may not be regarded as of any significance by either one side or the other, and be accounted one of the mediocrities, and feel oneself at heart to be nothing other than an ordinary person among ordinary people, yet despite all that one will arrive at a relatively fixed serenity in the end.  One will be able to raise one’s conscience to a level of development such that it will become the voice of a better and higher I that is the master of the ordinary I. And one won’t relapse into scepticism or cynicism, not become one of the vile mockers.    Not at once. Michelet puts it beautifully, and those few words by M. say everything I mean, ‘Socrates was born a real satyr, but through devotion, work, renunciation of frivolous things, he changed himself so completely that on his last day, before his judges and facing death, there was in him something of a god, a ray from on high, with which the Parthenon was illuminated’. Well, one sees the same thing in Jesus too, who began as an ordinary labourer and worked his way up to be something else, whatever it may have been, a personality so full of compassion, love, goodness, seriousness, that one is still drawn to it. In many cases a carpenter’s boy becomes a carpenter’s boss, small-minded, dry, mean, vain, and whatever one thinks of Jesus his approach to things was different from my friend the carpenter’s from the yard behind here, who has worked his way up to become a slum landlord5 and is a lot more complacent and much more preoccupied with himself than Jesus.
   But I mustn’t lapse into the abstract too much. My plan is first of all to regain my strength, and I think that when that’s once more above the low-water mark I’ll get new ideas to steer my way of working in a different direction from that dry one. We’ll talk about this again when you come — I don’t believe it’s a matter of a few days. If I get down some food, more nourishing than of late, in a couple of days I’ll be rid of my worst malaise, I believe, but it lies still deeper than that, and I wish I could carry on until I have an abundance of health and strength, which isn’t impossible to achieve if one is outside a good deal and has something one enjoys working on. For it’s a fact that at present ALL my work is TOO MEAGRE AND TOO DRY. That has become crystal clear to me recently, and I don’t doubt for a moment that a general, thorough change is needed. I plan to consult you again, when you’ve seen this year’s work, as to whether you agree with me about a few measures, and if you do then I think we’ll succeed in getting back on our feet. We mustn’t doubt but have collier’s faith. I hope the note is changed. I’m hugely glad you managed to send something, for I believe it spared me an illness. I’ll let you know what happens with the note. And it would be good if you could send on the first of Aug. I believe it’s still always possible that on looking through the work we may decide on another plan for the future — I don’t know what as yet — but somewhere there must be work that has to be done and that I can do as well as someone else. If London were a little closer, I for one wouldn’t leave it to others. Be assured as ever that it would give me enormous pleasure if we could make an article that would find buyers. I would then feel less conflict about the money from you that you could really do with yourself. Thanks again, and regards. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo. One of the things that have sometimes made me consider moving could be remedied in another way. Yesterday and the day before I walked in the neighbourhood of Loosduinen1 — went from the village to the sea, for instance — and found numerous cornfields, not as beautiful as those in Brabant, but still they must have reapers, sowers, gleaners there, one of the things that I’ve missed this year and that have made me feel a need for something different at times.  I don’t know whether you’re familiar with those parts, I for one had never been there before. I painted a study on the beach. There are some sea walls or breakwaters — moles, jetties — and very good ones too, made of weathered stones and plaited branches. I sat on one and painted the rising tide until it came so close that I had to pack up my things. Well, there between the village and the sea stand bushes of a deep, bronze-like green blown about by the sea wind, and so real that more than one makes one think: Oh, now this is Ruisdael’s Bush. One can now get there by the steam tram4 and so it can be reached even if one has baggage or must bring wet studies home.   See, this is a scratch of the path to the sea.  I thought of you particularly on that walk. I don’t doubt that you’ll agree with me that in the last 10 years the dunes in the vicinity of the city and Scheveningen have lost much of what was real and, another thing, are taking on a more frivolous character, more so each year. Now, not just 10 but 30 or even 40 or 50 years ago was when the painting of the dunes &c. in their true character started. At that time things were more Ruisdael-like than now. If one wants to see something that evokes a Daubigny, a Corot atmosphere, one must go further along to where the ground is almost untouched by the footsteps of visitors, etc.
   Scheveningen is undoubtedly very beautiful but nature there has long ceased to be virgin — well, I found the virginity of nature to be outstanding on the walk I told you about.   This is something like that mole. Rarely of late has the stillness, nature alone, so appealed to me. Sometimes it’s precisely those spots where one no longer feels anything of what’s known as the civilized world and has definitely left all that behind — sometimes it’s precisely those spots that one needs to achieve calm. Only I would have wished to have you there too, because I think you would have gained the same impression of finding yourself in surroundings just like I imagine Scheveningen was at the time when the first Daubignys appeared, and surroundings, I think, that were more of a stimulus to embark on something manly.  Perhaps when you come it would be nice if we were to be there together with nothing of civilization around us, only a poor shell cart on the white road, and then bushes that all looked like ‘Ruisdael’s Bush’.  Then the landscape, mostly very simple flat planes: areas of weather-beaten dune land just slightly undulating. I believe that if we were there together, that spot would put you and me into a mood in which we wouldn’t hesitate about the work but firmly feel what our intentions should be.
   Was it due to a chance correspondence between a rather sombre mood and those surroundings, or will I have the same impressions there again in the future? I don’t know, but if I again feel the need to forget about the present and to think of the age of the beginning of the great revolution in art of which Millet, Daubigny, Breton, Troyon, Corot are the leaders, then I’ll go back to that same spot.  I do wish you could be there once. Perhaps when you come we can go walking there; one is in Loosduinen in no time with the steam tram, and can even go on to Naaldwijk these days. The flat areas there behind Loosduinen, it’s just like Michel, and the lonely beach too. When, since our recent letters, I reflect less on the future than on the more or less present, I still have hopes that when you come we’ll take the decision that I should do a number of small watercolours for you just to try it out, and perhaps smaller paintings.  If only we can achieve enough leeway for me to be able to carry on painting continuously this year. That walk alone at a remote spot in the dunes made me much calmer because of a feeling that one hadn’t been alone but had talked to one of the old figures from the time of the beginning, Daubigny. It wouldn’t surprise me if you were also to remember that landscape if you walked there.  While writing this letter I’ve started a watercolour of that bush;8 I’ve painted a study of the other thing, that jetty. And in any event, this way I have a souvenir of the walk that I can show you when you come. And if you like we can walk there together when you come.  For the rest, I’m not yet exactly back to normal. It may be that my stomach is somewhat weakened, which is what I conclude from the symptom of dizzy spells in the head, etc., which are sufficiently troublesome to make doing something about them an urgent matter. But enough of this. That’s as far as I wrote yesterday. Now today — Monday — I’m happy to inform you that the torn note has been accepted in Paris and that I’ve lost very little on it, having received a total of twenty-three guilders.
   Now I have a matter to discuss with you that I hope you’ll approve of. In a previous letter I told you it was my firm opinion that it would be irresponsible if we didn’t do our best to take advantage of the net prices for paint, instead of paying the retail price as if there was nothing to be done about it. Thus losing 33 1/3  %. But because you didn’t answer on this point last year, I thought there might be difficulties about getting something in the name of G&Cie that was intended for private use, and for my part I took steps for which I had already prepared the way superficially to achieve the same result without your being involved, and I hope for heaven’s sake that you won’t doubt that this is practical. You know that I give lessons to a surveyor. Well, his father is a chemist and deals in paints; he’s a stockist for Paillard, and supplies Mauve among others. I’ve never had anything for teaching the son, but the father has often expressed his readiness to help. I took him up on this and said the following to him. That I had no doubt that there must be a fair number of tubes in his stock that were no longer in demand. That I could use them even so, and that I would take them from him for Paillard’s net price, on condition that in future he also supplied me with the saleable tubes on the same terms. At first he raised objections, but then he took another look at his stock and I reached an agreement with him along the above lines.  I’m taking nearly 300 tubes from him, including several carmine and ultramarine, for instance, for less (10 guilders off the whole lot, which would cost over 50 guilders at Paillard’s net price) than Paillard’s NET price, so the 300 tubes will cost me 40 guilders. For which I also gain the right to order all the paint I need in future for Paillard’s net price, thus saving 33  1/3 %. And I get that discount of 33  1/3  not only on oil paints but on watercolours too.
   We can discuss this again when you come. Naturally, I needn’t take or pay for the 300 tubes all at once, but in as many instalments as I wish — monthly, for example. But I’m glad of it, because 33 1/3 % will make quite a difference, especially in the long run. This will make it less impracticable to carry on painting. Today I bought a field easel and painting canvas. The first is nice, because one doesn’t get as dirty as when one works on one’s knees outdoors. At the moment I have about 7 watercolour studies of this summer, landscapes. I got some nourishing things with what you sent, but I have little appetite because my stomach isn’t working properly, and I fear it will be some time before that clears up.
   I’ll be glad when you come, because I think it will be good for a lot of things.  It would be good if you could send towards 1 Aug. At all events I’m glad that I’ll have some painted studies as well when you come. I have a model — a country lad — who lives here in the neighbourhood and to whom I’ve already spoken about painting studies. He can arrange to go off into the country with me, for instance into the dunes, very early in the morning. Adieu, best wishes in everything, and regards. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, Thank you for your letter of yesterday and for the enclosure. Fortunately the other note has also been changed for 23 guilders.  As a result I’ve been able to keep the most worrying things within bounds, although not everything, because a lot went off straightaway for paint that I’d had in the meantime.  I’m most eager to know if you’re planning to do the same as last year, first a few days at home and then straight to here.  Let’s agree that at home you won’t talk about problems in the future or the limited chances of placing the work. At least not right away, let’s have a talk together first and see what there still is.  Theo, I yearn desperately to paint the potato grubbers. I believe it would come out well. And even if it isn’t sold it will still help us to make progress, since people sometimes change once they see something they weren’t expecting. Well, I’ve already done a few studies for it, but I haven’t been able to take enough models, and now I see a chance to do them much better right away if only I could have enough cash.  This is just the right time, and for that reason there can be no question of taking a holiday, for I’ll keep at it as best I can. Still, your idea of doing the same as Weissenbruch would be mine too, but I literally can’t put it into practice, because going to the polders for a fortnight would cost me more than staying at home for a fortnight, and I don’t even know how I’ll scrape by at home for the next fortnight.
   But otherwise, as I’ve already written to you briefly, I’m outdoors a great deal, looking and doing landscape studies or seascape studies to have a distraction from the figure for once, and feel fine doing that.  But in fact the figure calls to me again, and so strongly that I try to do what circumstances to some extent permit.  If I could press ahead resolutely, the autumn wouldn’t pass without the potato grubbers being done.  I don’t know to what extent the studies I’m painting from the drawings will be satisfactory in the circumstances, but all the same I’ll see to it that I make something of them.  It isn’t very easy to get models at present, because there’s plenty of work in the fields, and I wish I could spend a little more, because that would overcome the problem. Anyway I shall — it’s absolutely impossible for me at present — but as soon as I can spare it I’ll see to it that I have a couple of chaps out in the dunes for a whole day for the potato grubbers.  That would be the most direct route, and I’ll do my best.  I hope to paint one or two things in the days to come between now and your arrival. I don’t yet feel in good health, but fortunately the work is so stimulating that while I’m busy I don’t feel the weakness so much, but it continues to overcome me in the intervals, when I’m not sitting before nature. A sort of dizziness sometimes, and headache too now and again, in short it’s a degree of weakening. I have postponed and postponed getting my strength back because there were more important things, and that has gone on for rather too long.
   But you’ll understand that the work is rather important, and precisely because I’ve already done a lot to it I couldn’t let it go. You’ll see when you come that the thing is for us to carry on resolutely. You rightly say that what I wrote to you about financial matters is worrying, but on the other hand we can’t be far from making a thing or two that can be sold, even if for relatively little. The work is becoming much clearer to me. And when I think about it, it’s only a question of accelerating or delaying, and later we’ll even catch up, even with the past, but it’s a devilishly thorny, difficult, anxious age we’re in, all the same. If it was possible for me to get enough to have sufficient paint and models this season, I believe there would be a brightening up, and a big one at that. Well, in any case, it’s very good that you’re coming soon.  A very heavy burden has largely fallen from my shoulders of late. Last year I repeatedly tried to paint figure studies. Well, I was driven to desperation by the way they turned out. Now I’ve started again and I no longer have anything directly hindering me in the execution, because I draw much more easily than last year. Then I got confused every time I lost my drawn sketch while painting. And had to work a long time to do that sketch, so that if I could only have the model for a short time absolutely nothing turned out well. But now I don’t give a rap if the drawing is erased, and I always do them 
   directly with the brush, and enough form comes into it to make the study useful. This is why I say that I see my way more clearly now; I know that I’ll need many studies, but they won’t be more difficult for me than drawing them. And so plenty of painting this year and we’ll have light. That’s certainly my hope.  This winter I plan to paint studies of heads like the few drawn ones I sent you. I would do that right away were it not that the figures have to be followed in the fields while the season lasts. Van der Weele is now travelling during the holidays — I heard that he has got the silver medal at Amsterdam for his painting of the sand loaders. When he’s back in town I hope that he’ll be a great help to me because I believe the potato grubbers will be to his liking and that he’ll be able to give me useful tips when I carry out my plan for it. And Rappard too, when he returns.  I did the first two figures that I painted this year just the same way as I tried last year — drawing first and then filling in the outline. That’s what I would call the dry manner. In the other manner one in fact does the drawing last and begins work by first seeking the tones without worrying much about it, about the drawing, just trying to put the tones roughly in their place in one go and to gradually define the form and the subdivision of the colours. Then one gets more of that effect of the figure coming out as if it’s surrounded by air, and it takes on a softer quality. While the colours become more delicate, because one goes over them often and sweeps one colour through another. You will surely see the difference if the first two I’ve done now stay in their present state. There’s an exhibition of drawings, which was in the Gothic Room last year, but I find it particularly thin this time, and there’s little that one hasn’t already seen by the same artists, and generally better. There are a few drawings by J. van Berg12 which I think are among the best of what there is. Usually Schipperus13 and suchlike are among the best.
   As to doing the potato grubbers, I’ve just now seen the making of Van der Weele’s large painting in part, and at Rappard’s all the studies for the paintings he did last year. So that I can just about imagine what would be involved for the definitive painting.  If it’s at all possible, I’ll do a few studies for it in the dunes before you come, namely going with a model to those fields behind Loosduinen, in the early morning or in the evening towards dusk. I believe that could be something. The composition of the drawing would have to be altered a little, and the effect in particular given more study, but I would keep it roughly as it is. I believe the figures should be forceful and all the rest in a lilac-like grey haze. I find the division into darker and lighter areas in the drawing not simple enough, the figures being partly light and partly dark, and the ground too. Either the ground and the figures must be brought closer to each other and form a dark silhouette against a light sky — or sky and ground must form more of a grey, misty whole against which the more toned areas of the figures stand out.  Both these effects exist, but that of the drawing isn’t right as it is now, for it’s too dry and too meagre. And because the figures have too many tones in common with the ground, they don’t stand out and the sky doesn’t belong to it. In short, the tone must be completely different but the composition can stay, more or less. It gives me a certain calm to think that we’ll see each other soon, and together look at how to continue with the work.  For the time being I’ll try to do a few more, and with that in mind I’d very much like to have the money of the tenth a few days earlier if possible. Then I could try to do those 
   studies in the dunes before you come. There isn’t the money for them now, because I’ve had to pay out so much. You remember what you wrote about the possibility of a disappointment with the percentage from the business. Well, I hope that that catastrophe doesn’t happen, but we must regard it as a pleasant surprise if it does turn out all right, and not lose a fraction of the time we have left. I believe there’ll be a chance by that time to get the work to the point where something can be done with it, but it will come down to steadily hacking a way through.  It would greatly surprise me if some didn’t finally begin to give up the idea that I intend or am doing something absurd. You will see what I mean in the studies and, I think, remember some of our earlier discussions about art. We must try to keep our spirits up and press ahead. What has given me a degree of encouragement of late is that, although I haven’t painted for several months, I believe there’s progress nonetheless in the painted studies done last year and now. This is because things like drawing and measuring proportions, with which I had a lot of trouble then, now fall into place more or less, and so as I sit before nature I need only think about painting, instead of thinking about two things at once, as it were, drawing and painting. When working it up, one again has to deal with both at once, but that’s different again.  Well, in the coming days I’ll live on the hope of your coming. If I manage to have some success with painting, times may become a little easier.  The fortnight between now and when you come won’t, however, be very easy to get through. If possible, remember what I asked you about receiving a little more a few days before the tenth, because then I could try to do those figure studies in the dunes before you come. Adieu, and thank you again for your letter, and wishing you good fortune in every respect. And believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Pending your arrival there’s hardly a moment that I’m not with you in my thoughts.  These days I’m doing my best to paint some different studies so that you can see something of them at the same time.  And I feel fine when I seek distraction through this change of work, for while I don’t literally do as Weissenbruch does and spend a fortnight with the polder workers, I nonetheless act in the same spirit, and looking at nature has a calming effect.  And, moreover, I have definite hopes of making considerable progress with colour in this way. It seems to me that the latest painted studies are more assured and sounder in colour.  Thus, for example, a few I did recently in the rain of a man on a wet, muddy road better express the mood, I believe. Anyway, we’ll see when you come. Most are landscape impressions. I wouldn’t claim that they’re as good as the ones sometimes found in your letters, since I often run into technical difficulties, but still I believe they have something similar.  For example, a silhouette of the city in the evening as the sun is setting, and a towpath with mills.
   Otherwise things are so wretched that I still feel faint if I’m not actually at work, but I believe that is passing. I’m definitely going to do my best to build up a reserve of strength, because I’ll need it if I want to do a lot of painting, including figures. A certain feeling for colour has been aroused in me of late when painting, stronger than and different from what I’ve felt before.  It may be that this recent malaise is connected to a kind of revolution in the working method which I’ve sought for more than once already, and have thought about a great deal. I’ve often tried to work less drily, but each time it came out roughly the same. But these days, now that some weakening prevents me from working as normal, it’s just as if this helps rather than hinders, and letting myself go a little and looking more through my eyelashes instead of looking sharply at the joints and analyzing how things fit together leads me more directly to see things as patches of colour next to each other.
   I’m curious as to how this will continue and where it will lead. It has sometimes surprised me that I’m not more of a colourist, because my temperament would certainly lead one to expect that, and yet up to now that has hardly developed at all.  I repeat, I’m curious as to how it will continue — I see clearly that my recent painted studies are different. If I remember rightly, you have another one from last year, of a few tree-trunks in the woods. I don’t think it’s particularly bad, but it’s still not what one sees in studies by colourists. There are even correct colours in it, but although they’re correct they don’t do what they should do, and while the paint is highly impasted here and there, the effect remains too meagre. I take this one as an example, and believe that the recent ones that are less impasted are nonetheless becoming more assured in colour, because the colours are more worked into each other and the brushstrokes are painted over each other, so that it fuses together more, and one captures something of the softness of the clouds or of the grass, for instance.  At times I’ve been very concerned that I wasn’t making progress with colour, and now I have hope again. We’ll see what happens. Now you can imagine how eager I am for you to come, for if you also see that it’s changing I’ll no longer doubt that we’re on course. I don’t dare trust my own eyes when it comes to my work.
   For example, the two studies that I did while it was raining, a muddy road with a small figure. It seems to me that it’s the opposite of some other studies — when I look at it I recognize the mood of that sad, rainy day, and in the figure, though no more than a few patches, there’s a kind of life that isn’t due to accuracy of drawing, for it isn’t drawn, so to speak. What I want to say is that I therefore believe that in those studies, for instance, there’s something of that mysteriousness that one gets by looking at nature as if through the eyelashes, so that the forms simplify themselves into patches of colour.  Time will tell, but for the present I see something different in the colour and the tone in several studies.  Lately I’ve thought sometimes of a story that I read in an English magazine, a tale of a painter in which a person featured who had also been weakened during a difficult time, and went to a remote area in the peat fields and found himself in the melancholy nature there, so to speak, and was able to paint nature as he felt and saw it. It was very accurately described in the story, evidently by someone who knew about art, and it struck me when I read it, and I’ve now been thinking of it from time to time these past few days.  Anyway, I hope we’ll soon be able to talk about it and confer together. If you can, write again soon and, of course, the earlier you can send, the more I would welcome it.  With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
   For no particular reason I can’t help adding something here that’s just a recurring thought of mine. Not only did I start drawing relatively late, but on top of that I can’t count on living for a great many years, relatively speaking. When I think about that cool-headedly and calculatedly — as if estimating or measuring something — then it’s in the nature of things that I can’t possibly know anything definite about it. Yet through comparisons with various people with whose life one is familiar, or in comparison with whom one believes one sees certain correspondences, one can nonetheless put forward certain propositions that aren’t absolutely without foundation.  So as to the length of time in which to work that lies ahead of me, I believe I may assume the following without being too hasty: that my body will endure for a certain number of years come what may — a certain number, say between 6 and 10. I dare all the more to assume this because at present there’s no immediate come what may.  That’s the period that I count on for sure, for the rest I would find it far too airily speculative to dare to determine anything in myself, given that whether or not anything is left after that period will depend precisely on these first 10 years, say. If one goes into a serious decline in those years, one won’t get past 40; if one remains sufficiently well preserved to withstand certain shocks to which a person is likely to be subject, solving more or less complicated physical problems, then from 40-50 one is once more in new, relatively plain sailing.  Calculations about that are not on the agenda now, but plans for a period, as I began by saying, of between 5 and 10 years are.
   My plan is not to spare myself, not to avoid a lot of emotions or difficulties. It’s a matter of relative indifference to me whether I live a long or a short time. Moreover, I’m not competent to manage myself in physical matters the way a doctor can in this respect. So I carry on as one unknowing but who knows this one thing — ‘I must finish a particular work within a few years’ — I needn’t rush myself, for that does no good — but I must carry on working in calm and serenity, as regularly and concentratedly as possible, as succinctly as possible. I’m concerned with the world only in that I have a certain obligation and duty, as it were — because I’ve walked the earth for 30 years — to leave a certain souvenir in the form of drawings or paintings in gratitude. Not done to please some movement or other, but in which an honest human feeling is expressed. Thus this work is the goal — and concentrating on that thought, what one does and does not do simplifies itself in that it’s not a chaos, but everything one does is one and the same aspiration. Now the work is going slowly — all the more reason not to lose any time. Guillaume Régamey was, I believe, someone who doesn’t have much of a reputation (as you know, there are two Régameys, F. Régamey paints Japanese and is his brother), but was a character for whom I have great respect all the same. He died at the age of 38, and a period of 6 or 7 years was devoted almost exclusively to drawings that are in a very singular style and were done while working was made difficult by physical problems. He is one of many — a very good person among many good people. I mention him not to liken myself to him — I’m not as good as he was — but to give an example of a certain self-control and willpower that held on to an inspiring idea that showed him the way to produce a good work in serenity despite difficult circumstances. I see myself in a similar way — as having to do something with heart and love in it within a few years, and do it with willpower. If I live longer, so much the better, but I’m not thinking about that. In those few years SOMETHING MUST BE DONE — that thought is my guiding principle in making plans for the work. A certain desire to make every effort will thus seem to you all the more understandable. At the same time a certain resolve to use simple means. And perhaps you’ll also be able to understand that, for my part, I don’t view my studies in isolation, but always have in mind the work as a whole. My dear Theo, The news that you’re already on the way by now gave me great pleasure. Thanks for your letter and the enclosure.  I don’t need to tell you that I’m eagerly looking forward to seeing you — I’ve been far from well in the last few days — always the same thing — heart palpitations as well at times — in the end, with me it may come down to the heart being affected. Well, I don’t know all about it in detail, but I do know that you mustn’t mention it at home or to anyone else for fear of it being misconstrued in their ideas of my circumstances.  By which I mean only that I want to do something good, come what may, and there’s a chance of bringing that about if we keep our serenity, dark future or no dark future.  I could meet you if I knew when, that’s to say on which train, you were coming. And supposing you come to see me while I’m out, the woman can tell you where I am because, so as not to miss you, I’m not going further from home than the Binkhorst1 behind here, to paint some studies.
   I’m very curious to know what you’ll think of the work, whether there’ll be anything which you think has something or not. Well, we’ll see. I keep thinking about undertaking the potato grubbers as a large painting, although it wouldn’t be finished before next year, and only half finished this season. It seems to me that the composition could stay as it is2 and a start could be made on it.  I’m not competent to determine the extent to which my feeling unwell has a physical cause or is due to nervous tension. It seems to me as if I ought to have been able to talk to you in the meantime and discuss the work, but now you’ve come at last and I firmly believe that our being together will calm me down at any rate. 
   I hope we’ll also go for a long walk together. Did I write to you that I had found thorn-bushes at Loosduinen exactly like Ruisdael’s Bush? That’s the area in which I propose to do studies for the potato grubbers. I hope I’ll soon be completely normal again, I’ll do my best at that, for I thoroughly detest not being able to make headway as I could if I had my full strength. As regards what I wrote to Rappard, that I didn’t think I was put into the world to conserve my constitution, this is a question of there being circumstances in which one must choose between working and not eating, or eating and letting the work go hang (namely when the work leads to expenses and for the time being produces no return). Well, in some cases I chose the former, and I don’t believe that was a mistake, since our work remains but we ourselves defnitely do not, and having something to do is life, and I would rather have a few years of that than many years of just daydreaming about it and procrastinating. And I also said then to Rappard that I, for one, thought there was truth in the mysterious words, whosoever shall seek to save his life shall lose it and whosoever shall lose his life for the sake of something higher shall find it.  Adieu, old chap, goodbye for now, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, I’ve just received a letter from home (please thank Pa for it, I hadn’t had the letter when I wrote), and I gather you plan to leave Breda at 2. on Friday. If there’s any change in your travel plans, let me know, and I’ll meet your train. Because if you’re in a hurry we must make sure not to let slip any time when we can be together. I’m working on a painted sketch for potato grubbers. I hope it comes off. I’m longing to see you, have a pleasant time, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Look closely at the fields in Brabant, what they’re doing there. And try to take a look at the interior of a weaver’s cottage in the village to see whether they aren’t beautiful things. Dear brother. I wish you could understand that I must be consistent in various things.  You know what an ‘error in the point of view’ is in painting, namely something very different from and much worse than a mistake in drawing this or that detail.  A single point determines the steeper or gentler incline, the way the sides of the objects develop more to the right or to the left throughout the whole composition.  Well, there’s something similar in life.  When I say I’m a poor painter and still face years of struggle — in my daily life I have to arrange things more or less as a farm labourer or factory worker does — then that’s a fixed point from which many things follow, which are thus taken out of their context if they’re viewed other than in general. There are painters in other circumstances who can and must act differently. Everyone must decide for himself.  If I’d had other opportunities, other circumstances, and if nothing of a decisive nature had happened, of course I would have been influenced in my actions. Now, though — and with all the more reason — because I, should there be the slightest question of seeing it as me arrogating to myself something to which I had no right, even if I had the right after all, but simply because of the question being raised, I withdraw of my own accord from contact with people who keep up a certain position, even from my family2 — thus we’re faced by this fact, my firm intention to be dead to everything except my work.
   Yet it’s difficult for me to speak about those otherwise simple, ordinary matters, because they’re unfortunately connected to much deeper things.  There is no greater ‘anguish’ than an inner struggle between duty and love, both raised to a high level. When I say to you, I choose my duty, you know all about it. The few words about it that we exchanged on the road made me feel that nothing has changed in me in this regard, that it is and will remain a wound which I live above but which is there deep down and cannot heal — years from now it will be what it was the first day.  I hope you understand what a struggle I had with myself of late — this: whatever happens (not enquiring about that what? for I don’t have the right to investigate it) — I want to be on my qui vive about remaining an honest man and being doubly attentive to duty. I never suspected nor do I suspect nor shall I suspect her of having financial considerations as her motive, other than what was just and fair. She went as far as was reasonable, others exaggerated. Beyond that, though, you understand that I presume nothing as regards love for me, and that what we said on the road goes no further. Things have happened since that wouldn’t have taken place if at a certain point I hadn’t been faced by a firm no, firstly, and, secondly, a promise that I would keep out of her way.
   I respected a sense of duty in her — I have never suspected her, shall never suspect her, of anything low. For my part I know one thing, that in the first place what matters is not to deviate from what is duty, and that one can’t compromise on duty.  Duty is something absolute. The consequences? We’re not responsible for them, but for the initiative of doing or not doing one’s duty, yes. Here one sees the exact opposite of the principle that the end justifies the means.  And my own future is a cup that cannot pass away from me except I drink it. So Thy will be done. Regards — safe journey — write soon — but you understand how I will approach the future, with serenity and without one sign in my face betraying the struggle in the deepest depths. Ever yours, Vincent You will understand, though, that I must avoid everything that might tempt me to hesitate, and so I must keep away from everything and everyone that might remind me of her. As a matter of fact, this year, too, that thought has sometimes made me more decisive than I otherwise would have been, and you see that I can do something like that in such a way that no one truly understands it.  Dear brother, Coming home just now, the first thing I feel I have to do is to make a request of you — a request which I have no doubt is necessary simply because you’ll see from it that my intentions are the same as yours. It is: not to rush me in the various matters we were unable to deal with all at once this time. For I need some time in order to decide. As for my relative coolness towards Pa, here’s something I want to tell you, because you brought it up. About a year ago now, Pa came to The Hague for the first time since I’d left home in search of peace, which I didn’t find there. Of course I was already with the woman then and said, ‘Pa, since I don’t blame anyone for finding something shocking in my behaviour, given the present conventions, I stay away of my own accord from those who I believe would be ashamed of me.
   And you understand that I won’t make it difficult for you, and as long as I haven’t yet got my affairs in order and am not back on my feet, wouldn’t you think it better if I didn’t visit you?’ If to that Pa had said something like ‘No, that’s going too far’, I would have been friendlier since, but Pa’s reply was in between yes and no; it was, Oh, do what you think best.  Well, thinking thus that they were more or less ashamed of me, which tallied with what you told me, I wasn’t a busy correspondent and nor was Pa, and neither his letters nor mine were particularly confiding. This, between you and me, is only to explain, not to draw further conclusions. The opposite of seizing the hand and insinuating one’s way in when someone offers only a finger is to let go of the hand that isn’t offered to us fully and freely. Or voluntarily going away from where one is merely tolerated.
   Whether or not I was mistaken, what do I know? There’s a bond between you and me which time can only strengthen if we press on with the work, and that is art, and I have hope we’ll continue to understand each other after all.  I fear I’ve said something to you about the work that I ought to have put differently, and have a vague feeling that I must have bothered you with something, because there seemed to be something the matter when you left.  I hope this will resolve itself. As to the work, what is becoming increasingly clear to me in everything since it caught my attention is the meagreness of the execution. That would worry me if I didn’t think it a natural consequence (which I believe I’ve also seen in the early work of very many people I find sympathetic), a natural consequence of the effort one must make to overcome the very first obstacles. And, looking back on recent years, seeing them full of trouble behind me. That trouble having subsided, there will be another period of working, I hope.
   This error is so pervasive and its correction so badly needed that we must see to it that we take steps to give us a period of calm. And so work at it; otherwise it will stay like that. I am as my work is, and you must take this into consideration a little. I don’t know whether or not you think it would be better to see someone like Herkomer, Green or Small, for instance, now or to wait until both the work and I myself have calmed down. I’d be in favour of the latter. Things inside me may clear up soon, but at the moment I’d rather not have to navigate through complicated London affairs. As regards one or two things that you said to me when you left, I hope you won’t forget that one or two things about my clothes &c. are somewhat exaggerated. If it were really so, well I’d be the first to admit my fault, but it seems to me that it’s an old piece of gossip dragged up from the past rather than based on recent observation — unless I’m out in the fields or in the studio.
   You mustn’t rush me if you truly want to make this clear to me. This year I’ve been completely outside any kind of social circle, so to speak.  And in truth haven’t bothered about clothes.  If that’s all, it won’t be so difficult to change, will it?, especially now that I have the new suit from you. But I sincerely wish that people would forgive me such failings rather than talk about them.  If I get irritated about this, it’s because I’ve already heard so much about it; dressed up one time and less so another, and it’s a story like that of the farmer, his son and the donkey, the moral of which, as you know, is that people are hard to please.  It wasn’t so much that I got angry with you as that you astonished me, because you know how much pain I’ve already suffered over it, and that it has become a piece of gossip that won’t disappear whatever I do. Anyway. At all events I have the new suit from you and the old one, which is certainly still good, and so it’s over for the time being, isn’t it?, and let’s say no more about it.
   If only I had got a bit further so that it would be easier to sell, I would definitely say, you be the man who takes care of business, I don’t want to have anything to do with selling, and live entirely outside those circles. Unfortunately, though, I can’t yet say that now, and you aren’t to blame for that, but I ask you for patience in both our interests and for the sake of peace. I’m terribly sorry that I make life difficult for you — perhaps it will clear up by itself — but if you’re faltering, tell me plainly. In that case I would rather give up everything than make you carry a heavier burden than you can bear. Then I would certainly go to London right away to look for anything, no matter what, even carrying bales, and leave art for better times, at least having a studio and painting.
   When I look back on the past, I always come up against the same fatal points that are still not entirely clear to me and that coincide with the months August 1881 to February 1882. That’s why I can’t help mentioning the same names all the time. Which appeared to astonish you.  Dear brother, don’t think of me as being anything other than an ordinary painter facing ordinary problems, and don’t imagine there’s anything unusual when there are hard times. I mean, don’t picture the future either black or brightly lit; you’ll do better to go on believing in grey.  Which I also try to do, and I consider it a fault if I deviate from that.  Regards, and Ever yours, Vincent As for the woman, I don’t doubt that in any event you’ll understand that for my part I shan’t rush matters. 
   And as for how I think about selling, I wanted to say this again. I believe that the best would be if we carry on working until, instead of having to praise or explain it to art lovers or say something to go with it, they feel drawn to it of their own accord. At any rate, if it’s refused or doesn’t please, one must remain dignified and calm as far as possible. I fear that my efforts when I present myself do more harm than good, and I wish I could be spared that.  It’s so painful for me to talk to most people, I’m not afraid to, but I know I make a disagreeable impression. Attempts to change that may well come up against the difficulty that the work would suffer if one lived differently. And provided one perseveres with the work, it will turn out all right later. Take Mesdag, a veritable mastodon or hippopotamus, all the same he sells his paintings. I haven’t got as far as that yet, but the person I mention also began late9 and worked his way up by an honest, manly route, whatever else he may be. It’s not in the least because of laziness that I don’t do this or that; rather it’s to be able to work more and to leave aside anything not directly part of the work.
   Just to return briefly to what you said on leaving: ‘I’m beginning to think more and more like Pa’. Well, so be it, you speak the truth, and I for my part, while as I said not thinking or doing exactly the same, respect this character and know of a weak side to it perhaps, but also a good side. And when I consider that if Pa knew anything about art I would doubtless be able to talk to him more easily and agree with him more; suppose you become like Pa plus your knowledge of art — fine — I believe we’ll continue to understand each other.  I’ve had repeated disagreements with Pa, but the bond has never been completely broken.  So let’s simply allow nature to develop: you will become what you become, I too shan’t stay exactly as I am now. Let us not suspect each other of absurd things and we’ll continue to get by. And let us reflect that we’ve known each other from childhood, and that thousands of other things can bring us ever closer.  I’m a little concerned about what seems to be bothering you, and doubt whether I know exactly what the trouble is. Or rather, I believe the cause lies not so much in a particular, specific matter as in the realization that there are points on which our characters diverge, and that one of us understands one thing better and the other something else. I believe that this is desirable, if you and I try to remain in agreement. One thing — if I become too much of a burden on you — let the friendship remain, even if you can give less help financially. I’ll complain now and again — I’m in a fix over this or that — but without any ulterior motive, and more just to say it for once than because I demand or expect from you that you can do everything, which indeed I wouldn’t do, old chap!
 0  It grieves me that I said things that I, for my part, would like to take back entirely if need be, or wish I had left unsaid — or, supposing you conceded they had a grain of truth in them, would like to have them regarded as highly exaggerated. For be assured that the continuing main thought — compared with which all the rest becomes as little as nothing — is and will remain, whatever the future brings, a sense of gratitude towards you. Furthermore, if I’m ever less fortunate in the future, in no circumstances — I say in NO CIRCUMSTANCES — you understand — not even if you have to withdraw your help entirely — shall I regard it as your fault. Which wouldn’t need to be said, had I not said things more because of the strong effect of my nerves than because I think you should have said something more adequate at the time when I was calm. Forget about that, you’d be doing me a favour if you took that as unsaid. I think that if that turns out all right, it will turn out all right by itself through time when I’m calm, but in nervousness I blame it now on this, now on that.  It’s the same with other things, which I don’t want to drag up now, although I later remember what I say, even in nervousness, and a grain of it may be right, yet not all beginnings have a continuation, and in nervous tension they often seem more than they are.  For my part, although there seemed to be something wrong when you left, shall also not go on about it. I do indeed think about what you say, and have already written to you about clothes that I don’t refuse them and agree with you completely — but would have known even if you hadn’t said it — that attention would be paid to appearance if ever I were to go to Herkomer or someone. Also, what you said about Pa — there was now a reason for writing more to Pa than otherwise, and you will read the letter. And the same with everything else.  In short, if I pass judgement on people, circumstances, circles in which I do not move, it’s understandable that I don’t hit the mark but fantasize beyond nature and see things very fantastically, just as everything becomes strange when seen against the light. You, who are closer, don’t understand how it’s possible that they can appear a little like that when seen at a distance, in retrospect. And even if I saw everything totally wrong, anyone who thought it over would perhaps understand that, given certain events, I can hardly speak otherwise. Where things became confused was a brief period, and that brief period CANNOT but occupy a place in my thoughts constantly, and I regard it as natural that that moment must have a reaction in the future, because people, even if they deliberately avoid each other, still inevitably end up facing each other in the course of time. My dear Theo, As I write this I’m also writing a letter to Pa in which there are one or two things I shan’t repeat now. Be so good as to read Pa’s letter. In this letter to you I wish to say again that it seems to me more and more that the most practical and direct way to make progress with the work is not to look too far away and to stay down to earth. When I think of London, it’s a stimulating thought, I assure you, but the question is: is it practicable now, is now the right moment? Wouldn’t it be better if I said plainly to myself: ‘Consider your work not yet mature enough, because what you want and intend doesn’t yet seem to be sufficiently comprehensible to those who see it, since they’re more or less startled by it, so to speak — carry on — work faithfully and forcefully from nature — look again deep in the country on the heath or in the dunes, and for the time being let it be enough that those who have seen it don’t yet see much in it now, so don’t go on showing it, don’t count on support in London right away, it must be better’? I say things like that to myself and, after taking into consideration what I write here about the woman, you’ll probably also think that there are reasons to doubt whether London can or should be done right away.  I’m unable to decide yet. But a simple thought that seems to me right, precisely because of its simplicity, is that I should take no steps 
   other than to live more cheaply by moving to the country, somewhere where the land has character. I’m eager to know whether Pa and you can more or less follow my feelings as regards staying with the woman. I’d like that to be possible, because then, instead of sending the woman onto the streets, we’d respond to her promise of better behaviour by forgiving and forgetting. It’s better that she be saved than that she goes under.  This morning she says this to me, ‘As for what I used to do, I don’t even think about it and I haven’t talked to mother about it either, but I know that if I have to go I won’t earn enough, mainly because I have to pay the children’s board, and that if I went on the streets on that account it would be because I had to, not because I wanted to.’ I believe I once wrote to you about what took place between us when she was in the hospital and I hadn’t yet decided whether or not to take her into my house. She asked for nothing then, which contrasts sharply with more normal times with her.  I can’t say exactly what her expression was like, 
   but something like a sheep wanting to say, if I must be slaughtered I won’t resist. Anyway, so heart-rending that I can’t do otherwise than forgive completely, indeed sooner feel guilt myself than accuse. Nonetheless I’ve kept all this to myself and made her promise various things — to be more orderly, harder working, to pose better, not to go to the mother &c. And now for me too it’s completely forgiven, completely forgotten without reservation, and I take her side just as I used to in the past.  It’s a deep compassion that is so strong that everything else gives way to it, and I can no more do otherwise now than I could last year in the hospital, and I say now as then, as long as I have a crust of bread and a place to live you have a home there. It wasn’t passion then, nor is it passion now, it’s understanding each other’s needs as convincing facts. But knowing now how she was often upset by her family last year, and fearing that she may relapse, I would like to be able to live with her in a village somewhere where she saw nothing of the city and was confronted with a great deal of nature as a matter of course. After all, I’ve known from the start that it will take years before her constitution is fully restored, and so there’s still hope.  Well, the little boy is terribly attached to me; these days he’s always at my side wherever I go in the house, now that he’s beginning to crawl and to stand. You see, Theo, by acting according to what we clearly and steadily feel, I believe that we may well lapse into mistakes, and come up against a brick wall any number of times, but we’ll be preserved from great evil and from despair if we ask what duty is — and do that which must be done as best we can.
   As to the work, I don’t doubt that there are things wrong with it, but I also don’t doubt that I shan’t lose my way completely, and that I’ll arrive at something good, albeit after much searching. And I believe that it’s dangerous to try to progress through something other than what is directly work.  I wish I had fellows like Mauve or, to mention someone else, Herkomer as friends, although this isn’t the very first thing that I think matters, and they’d also not regard it as the first.  By steadily working on, whether for a long or a short time, whether with more or less success, sooner or later among the painters one is bound to meet a friend for life, such as M. or H., say, might be. And perhaps sooner when one works on quietly than when one goes and asks him or visits him, which with me has less chance of success because of one or two eccentricities that you feel I have more than I do. For I do see something of that, but not that it’s so bad that I ought not to be surprised at times at the long duration of difficulties in finding some trust among people. Supposing my faults were just as bad and as indisputable as those of the woman, for instance, then I would like someone to do for me what I’ve done for the woman, and on several occasions — to forgive me not by halves but through and through, as if there had been absolutely nothing wrong and never would be. If perhaps you said something to C.M. about me possibly leaving the woman, then please take it back immediately — I can’t do something that now seems to me cruel or merciless. I don’t know whether I’ll be happy with the woman in future, and maybe I won’t — it will certainly not be perfect — but happiness is not what we’re accountable for; we’re accountable for the extent to which we follow our conscience.  Adieu, old chap, and, if you will, write me one more letter while you’re in Nuenen. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Now you must read Pa’s letter. I can’t say anything different. If I left the woman, she might go mad, but because I for my part have more than once found a way of calming her down during her moods of intolerable bad temper, for example by dispelling a fear that oppressed her, because in the course of this year she has learned to see that in me she has a true friend who helps her with her weaknesses and understands what’s wrong, there has come into her that je ne sais quoi of calm when I’m with her, and in time she will, I hope, get better, particularly if what drags her back into the past, of which she’d preferably not be reminded, no longer draws her.  A move is desirable, though, but it must also be an economy measure.
   She has been told things such as that I would leave her because of the children, for example. This isn’t true, that wouldn’t be my reason in any event, but it’s one of the things that disorientate her and make her wish she didn’t have the children.  Theo, the fact is that she does learn, but one has to point out the same thing to her many times, and she’ll sometimes drive a person to despair, yet when she — but it rarely happens — comes to say what she wants and intends, it’s strange how pure she is despite her corruption. As if deep down something in the ruin of her soul and heart and spirit has been saved.  And her expression in those rare moments is like that of a Mater Dolorosa by Delacroix5 or certain heads by Ary Scheffer. I believe in that, and now that I’ve seen that again, I respect that depth and hold my tongue about her faults.  I hope you see a few more beautiful sunsets above the quiet land, old chap, far away from the city, before you go back to the city. As to changing where I live, I know that this can be done at more than one place.  But of course we do what we do calmly and so we’ll write about it again. Adieu — I wish you pleasant days, and assure you that whatever the future may bring, I continue to hope that later days will be calmer.  My dear Theo, You’ll understand that I’m rather eager to hear from you whether you’ve read my letter. As for myself, the course that’s the cheapest by our calculations — I believe a village would be the answer — would seem to me the most sensible in the given circumstances. If the 150 francs a month can continue, I believe we can cover the cost completely, or nearly so. Dear brother, you see that it doesn’t look as if there’ll be any leeway for me, in any event. I’ll try not to complain, and swallow what I can swallow. I remain convinced that actually more is required for the work, and that I ought to be able to spend a little more on food and other needs, but if I must manage with less — after all, my life may not be worth the food — why should I make a fuss about it? And it isn’t anyone’s direct fault, not mine either. I hope, though, that you understand one thing — that one cannot do more than scrimp, even on food, clothes, every kind of comfort, everything that’s really needed. When one has stinted oneself even in those things, there can be no question of unwillingness, can there? You understand that if someone said to me, do this, do that, do a drawing of this or that, I wouldn’t refuse, indeed I would try repeatedly with pleasure if it didn’t work the first time. But no one says that, or so vaguely, so in general, that it confuses me rather than helps me on my way.
   Dear brother, regarding clothes, I’ve put on what I got without wishing for more, without asking for more. I’ve worn clothes from Pa and from you that sometimes fit my body differently and I can’t help that, also because the waists may differ. If you won’t mention that my dress occasionally leaves something to be desired, I’ll be content with what I have and even grateful for it, in no small measure, although of course at a later stage I’ll return to it if I can, and hope to say to you: Theo, do you remember the days when I went round in a long minister’s coat of Pa’s &c.?; and it seems to me that quietly registering things now and laughing about them together later when we’re more on top of them is infinitely preferable to arguing about them now. For the present, if I have to go out I have your suit that you brought, and more that is presentable. Forgive me if I don’t wear it in the studio or out of doors, that would be to ruin it wilfully, because one always gets some stain or other when painting, and particularly when trying to capture an effect in rain and wind. My view as regards earning money is as simple as can be; it is that it must come through the work, and that in the circumstances I gain nothing by speaking to people about it personally. Yet if I see a chance, I pursue it, for instance, what I told you about Belinfante, and Smulders. But so far I’ve had little luck. Well, I shan’t grieve about that as long as you don’t upset me by suspecting me of being unwilling.
   For I believe that if you think about it carefully you won’t doubt that I’m industrious, and if, moreover, you were to demand that I asked people to buy from me, I would do it, but I might then become melancholic. If possible, allow me to go on as before. If not, and if you want me to call on people with my work, I shan’t refuse if you advise that. Yet, dear brother, human brains can’t withstand everything. Take Rappard, who got brain fever and has now gone all the way to Germany to get rid of it. I become more agitated than is good for me when I take steps like going to people to talk about the work. And what do I come away with? A refusal or a fobbing-off. It wouldn’t agitate me if it was you, say, who know me and to whom I’m used to speaking. I tell you, I feel less energetic outdoors when I’ve been among people. If we don’t waste time with steps of that kind, we’ll make progress slowly but surely, and I know of no better way. In no case shall I refuse a serious commission, whatever is asked for, to my liking or not, I’ll try to do it as required, or do it again if required. In short, I resolve not to get impatient in any event, even if people were deliberately to make it difficult for me. I can’t say more than that, and if you care to commission something from me, you can carry out a test, or several tests. I’m at your disposal.
   I believe there’s a difference between now and the past. In the past more passion went into both the making and the judging of work. One made a definite choice for this or that movement, one enthusiastically backed one side or another. There was more verve. Now I believe there’s a spirit of caprice and satiety. People are generally more lukewarm. For my part, I wrote to you before that it seemed to me that since Millet a sharp falling off was evident, as if the peak had already been reached and decline had set in. This affects everyone and everything. I’m always glad that I saw the collection of drawings by Millet at the Hôtel Drouot. At the moment you’re in Nuenen. I wish, brother, that there were no reasons for me to be absent. I wish we were walking together through the old country churchyard or at a weaver’s. Now that isn’t so. Why not? Oh, because I realize that I would seem like a spoilsport in the given atmosphere. Theo, again — I don’t entirely understand it, and think it has gone rather too far when both you and Pa feel ashamed to walk a little with me. For my part I’ll keep away, though my heart yearns to be together. At least, given that I at any rate can’t do without that brief moment of seeing either you or Pa with no reservations for once — solely because of unbreakable bonds — henceforth I would like us never again to discuss the question of conventions or clothes when we see each other. You see from everything how instead of insinuating my way in I withdraw as far as possible. But conventions mustn’t cause a general cooling. That one point of light that we see each other briefly once a year mustn’t be clouded over. Adieu, Ever yours, Vincent 
   As to the work, I don’t hesitate. You’ve read Fromont Jeune and Risler aîné, haven’t you? I do NOT see you in Fromont Jeune of course, but I do see a resemblance between myself and Risler aîné — in his absorption in his work, his decisiveness in that, while otherwise he was an ‘ordinary chap’ and fairly nonchalant and short-sighted, his few wants for himself, so that he changed nothing for himself when he became rich. As regards my work all my ideas are so ordered, so definite, that I believe you’d do well to accept what I say: let me get on with it as I am; my drawings will become good if we stay on the normal footing with each other, but because the improvement depends a little on the money for my outgoings and expenses — and not only on my efforts — be as generous as you can with the money, and if you see a chance to add any help from another quarter, don’t let it slip. But in fact these few lines contain everything I have to say. You mustn’t let yourself be misguided as to my true character by my actions when I left Goupil. If the firm had been for me then what art is for me now, I would have acted more decisively then. But in fact I was unsure then about whether it was my career or not, and I was more passive. When I was asked, wouldn’t you like to leave?, I said, you think I should leave?, then I’ll leave. No more than that. There was more silence then than talk.
   If it had been dealt with differently, if they’d said: we don’t understand how you acted in this or that case, explain it, it would have turned out differently.  I already told you, brother, discretion isn’t always understood. Too bad, perhaps. It’s better I have the career I have now, I believe, but when I left Goupil there were motives other than clothes, on my side at any rate. There was a half or whole plan then for me to get a position in paintings at the new branch in London, which in the first place I didn’t consider myself suitable for, and in the second had no interest in. I would have liked to stay with the firm if I’d been given a position that consisted less exclusively of talking to the customers. In short, if I’d been asked then, do you enjoy the business?, my answer would have been, yes, certainly. Would you like to stay? Yes, if you consider me worth what I earn and don’t consider me a hindrance or harmful. Then I would have asked for a position at the printer’s perhaps, or for the one in London — but slightly altered — and would have got it, I believe. They didn’t ask me anything, though, just told me, ‘You are an honest and hard-working employee but you set a bad example to the others’, and I said nothing to refute that because I didn’t want to influence whether or not I would stay. I could have said a great deal to refute that, though, if I had wanted, and indeed things that I believe would have ensured that I could stay. I say this because I don’t understand how you couldn’t know that it was a question not of dress but of very different matters.
   Well — to you — I say what I don’t doubt is right to say now, given that my profession is my profession and I don’t doubt that I should stay in it. So I say this to you: not only do I wish to keep things between us as they are, but I’m really so grateful for our relationship that I only enquire about poorer or richer, more or less difficult, taking nothing for granted, that I’m content with all conditions and will fit in, adapt, make do if need be. But I desire only that you shouldn’t doubt me with respect to good will, application — and grant me a little common sense so that you don’t suspect me of doing silly things, and so quietly let me carry on working in my normal way. Of course I must seek in order to find, and not everything will come off by a long way, but in the end the work will be good. Patience until it’s good, not letting go until it’s good, not doubting, is what I would like you and I to have together and to hold on to. If we hold onto that, I don’t know to what extent we’ll benefit financially, but I do believe that — on condition of collaboration and solidarity, however — we’ll be able to persevere for our whole lives, sometimes selling nothing and finding life hard, then at times selling and having it easier. That’s sufficiently brief and to the point. Persevering depends on our will to stay together. As long as that will exists, it is possible.
   Now I mention Risler aîné again (I believe you know the book, if not read it sometime, and what I mean will be clear to you) and point out to you how that man’s appearance was more or less like mine, how his life was working in the attic of the factory on his designs and machines, how he had no time for or interest in anything else for that matter, and his greatest luxury for himself was to drink a glass of beer with an old acquaintance. The story in the book is one that’s of no importance here, other things in the book aren’t relevant. I draw your attention to the character, the way of life of Risler âiné in itself, without any thought of anything else in the story. Really only to explain to you that I think very little about my clothes because of my way of working — of doing business, if you like – is working personally, NOT approaching people. A few friends I’ll have later will, believe me, take me as I am. I think you’ll understand this letter, and understand that it isn’t a case of me getting angry when something is said to me about clothes. No, inside I’m becoming ever more calm and concentrated, and something very different would be needed to make me angry. Wherever I went, I would be roughly the same — perhaps really making a bad impression everywhere in the beginning. But I doubt whether that would remain for ever with the people I talked to about it face to face. Well, from this moment on I’m again completely absorbed in the work. Do for me what can be done, think yourself about what could be useful or help us to get somewhere more quickly. I don’t doubt your good will or friendship. Regards, enjoy your days, and write soon. Adieu. Vincent Dear brother, Your letter arrived today and gave me leeway in many respects. Accept my thanks for the step taken with C.M. — I’ll thank C.M., send him some studies, otherwise, especially about the woman, nothing. But just one more thing. I’ll write you a letter in the next few days which I’ll write at my leisure, and I’ll do my best to write briefly and still say what I believe is necessary. You could then keep this letter so that — when you’re with someone who might be persuaded to take studies by me — you can explain to them my precise idea and intention. My idea being this above all — a single drawing by me won’t be entirely satisfactory in itself, even in the future. A number of studies, no matter how diverse, will still complement each other. In short, in my view it would be better for the art lovers themselves if they took several rather than just one. And if it comes down to a question of money, I would rather have an art lover who bought regularly at a low price than one who only bought occasionally, even if he paid well.  Perhaps if you again proposed to C.M., say, in your words or mine, what was raised last year, the outcome might be that he might see more in my idea if I expressed myself more clearly.  Anyway, more about this later. I can also tell you that I’ve had a visit from Rappard and that he saw the larger drawings and spoke warmly of them. When I told him that I felt a little weak and thought this might be because doing them isn’t easy, he seemed not to doubt that this was one of the understandable matters.
   We talked about Drenthe. He’s going there again shortly, and he’s going still further, namely to the fishing villages on Terschelling. For my part I’d very much like to go to Drenthe, especially after Rappard’s visit. So much so, indeed, that I’ve looked into whether moving all the things would be easy or difficult.  Through Van Gend & Loos7 one could even take along the furniture (the stove and bed) by taking half a goods wagon, in which case hardly any packing cases would be needed. Of course I’m considering that because, although the things I have aren’t worth very much, it would still be a big outlay if one had to set up house all over again.  But my intention would then be to go with the woman and children.  We’d be faced with the costs of moving and the travel costs.  Once there, I believe I would stay for good in the heathland and the peat districts, where more and more painters are coming, and in time a kind of painters’ colony might develop. Life there is so much cheaper than here that I believe it would save me 150 or 200 guilders a year in any case, on housing especially in any case.
   And having paid my debt with the money from C.M., it might be desirable to make the move quickly. A journey there to assess the situation would seem to me unnecessary, really.  I have a map of Drenthe in front of me. On it I see a large white area with no names of villages. It’s crossed by the Hoogeveen waterway, which ends suddenly, and I see the words Peat moors written on the map straight across the blank area. Around that blank area a number of black dots with the names of villages, a red dot for the small town of Hoogeveen.  On the boundary a lake — the black lake — a name that gives pause for thought — I imagine various dredging workers on the banks.  Several village names, like Oosterheuvelen, Erica, also make one think. Anyway, let me know what you think of the possibility of a rapid move to that region. If it were to happen, I’d begin by going by information from Rappard’s experiences there. Then follow his advice to go further into the remoter part whose appearance on the map I’ve described. One of these days I’ll try to get hold of a detailed map of Drenthe showing the types of terrain.
   We’d be faced by immediate expenditure, but in the end I believe we’d gain a great deal by it. More than that, I consider it important that I’d be in a region that’s sure to be very stimulating and sure to incline one naturally towards everything serious, and my work can only be improved by it.  How much would the expenditure be? I’ll work it out more precisely for you in the next few days. I assume the whole family counts as 2  1/2  people (but they may insist on 3). The travel costs aren’t given in my timetable, but will be less than 10 guilders per person, I assume. Gend & Loos estimated that a  1/2 wagon to Assen would be 20 guilders.  One would have to be prepared, though, to stay at the inn for a few days, which costs around 1 guilder per person per day. Here the rent above all, and moreover the cost of everything, is nerve-racking. And the heaviest expense, the cost of models, would most certainly be different over there in the sense that for the same amount I could get more and better models or the same number for less money.  I think that if I were to settle somewhere there, Rappard would come even more often to that area than now, and we’d be company for each other.  As I say, my thoughts have become fixed on Drenthe, particularly since his visit and what we discussed in connection with the work. For that matter I can also look for a cheaper house here if need be, and I do find it beautiful here too. But still, I would like to be alone with nature for once — without the city. I can hardly tell you how much pleasure what you say about the work gives me — I’m glad you say that doing something else as well would really be the wrong policy. One would then lapse into the half measures that make someone a half person. What we must work at is getting yet more of a manly element12 into it. I don’t think you’ll have to retract your view that you already see something of that, particularly not when I have my strength back. It’s a nuisance that my stomach can’t take even normal things, or what I’d have an appetite for if I gave in to it — only sour apples. I don’t give in, but enough, there is more weakening than is right. I’m also expecting a letter from Rappard about Drenthe. In any case, I’ll write to you again soon about a plan to simply stay here when I have information from my landlord13 about a place in Voorburg that he says I may be able to get cheaply. Adieu, many thanks again. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, This morning I was at Van der Weele’s and saw the studies he brought back from Gelderland. And my desire to go to Drenthe wasn’t diminished by what I heard from him. He happened to know that one of the villages I had in mind had a beautiful natural setting full of character.  I told him again that I wished I’d learned more about painting this year. Well, his answer was: Oh, don’t go moaning about that. In the first place everyone has his personal doubts, if he learns from someone else, often the result is that in addition to his own weaknesses he acquires those of his master as well. Carry on calmly without worrying about that. Well, basically I think just the same, except that I would find it too conceited if I didn’t continue to try to be on the qui vive to learn from others. But what one sees or hears from someone else in this way should perhaps be seen as a stroke of luck.  You can see a small indication of how unstable the woman is in her character when I tell you this, that since her specific promise recently not to go to her mother’s she went there anyway. So I said to her that if she couldn’t keep such a promise for even 3 days, how could she expect me to think her suited to promising faithfulness for ever?  For I find this very wicked of her, and am almost forced to conclude that she belongs more with that lot than with me. Says again, though, that she’s sorry but — she’ll do it again tomorrow, that’s what I begin to think, but she says, Oh no. 
   This almost makes me regret taking things seriously.  When I made her promise, I said to her: if you go there it’s associated with whoring in three ways, first because you were living at your mother’s at the time, and she herself urged you to go on the streets. Next because she lives in the middle of a vile neighbourhood which you have more reason to avoid than anyone else, and lastly your brother’s whore2 lives in that house. But even now it isn’t absolutely impossible that she might turn out all right, for instance after being in the country for a time and away from that whole family mess, but who can assure me that over there it won’t be, ‘How miserable it is here, why did you bring me here?’ She makes me afraid of those things, even when I do my utmost not to resort to the extreme of abandoning her.  What Zola says seems to me to be true, ‘Yet these women are not bad, for their faults and their fall are due to “the impossibility” of living a straight life in the midst of the gossip and calumny of the corrupt suburbs’ — you know what I mean from L’assommoir. I know well enough that there’s a difference too, but still there are points of resemblance between how I stand in relation to her now and the passage in L’assommoir in which the smith sees that Gervaise is going down the wrong path and that he has no influence on her because she can’t decide to take sides, being two-faced and because everything before her eyes is cloudy.
   I feel more compassion for the woman than ever before because I see that she’s very unsettled. I believe that at the moment she has no better friend than me, who would sincerely help her more if she allowed me to. But she doesn’t seek my trust, and makes me absolutely powerless by giving her trust to those who are in fact her enemies. I truly believe that she doesn’t understand that there is evil in what she does — or doesn’t want to understand it, I sometimes think.  Long ago last year I went through the period when I got angry about things she did wrong. When I now see her lapsing into the same faults, it no longer surprises me, and if I knew it would be her salvation I believe I could accept it. Because the way I think of her is that ‘nonetheless I don’t believe she’s bad’. She has never seen, so to speak, what good was; how can she be good? I mean that she isn’t responsible in the same way as someone who understands that there’s a distinction between evil and good; fundamentally she has never reached that understanding other than by instinct, in a very vague and confused way. I believe that if she knew what she must do, she would do it.  What you said — that you thought it would do her good if she was away from me — is something I would probably agree with myself, were it not that she’d then fall back on her family in the first place and in the second would have to give up the only thing that’s now keeping her more or less on the right path — her children.  It’s a situation in which one sees no way out. She frets inwardly about many things, I know that, sometimes she frets so much that one takes pity on her, but that she — and long ago — from the very beginning could have, should have, fully trusted me — that was never the case, although I certainly told her that and showed it too, right in the beginning. What she listened to and believed more was that I would leave her in the lurch after all, which, if it were finally to happen in the end, precisely because she sees it like that, would be more the family’s fault than hers, because the family continually upset her with that.
   I don’t know whether it’s understandable the way I put it, but this is the position — fundamentally she wants to be with me and is attached to me, but she’s blind to the fact that it’s she who’s taking herself away from me. And if I say anything about that it’s — yes, I know very well, you won’t take me anyway.  Now those are the good moods and what the bad moods are is still more desperate. Then she says frankly, well, yes, I am indifferent and lazy, and I always have been and there’s nothing to be done about it — or, well, yes, I’m a whore, or ‘it’s bound to end up with me jumping into the water.’5 When one thinks for a moment about that neglected, half or rather wholly corrupted character of hers — which I would say has been dragged through the sewer — then I for one say, in the end she cannot be other than she is, and I would find it stupid and arrogant of myself if I condemned her in grand, solemn-sounding words. Perhaps you’ll understand better now than in the past how I came to apply to her what the priest Bienvenu in Victor Hugo’s Misérables used to say to ugly, even poisonous beasts: Poor beast, it isn’t her fault that she’s like that. And you’ll understand that I would so dearly like to stop her going under that, if that could be achieved by marrying her, for instance, I would marry her even now. But would it be achieved? If, say, in Drenthe she were to start nagging: why did you bring me here?, one wouldn’t have made the slightest progress. One can’t fully explain everything in a case like this all at once, nor understand everything all at once. But you can see, can’t you, that she’s a creature who is most unhappy and not very suited — such a restless temperament — to any position in service, of whatever kind? By the way, in Leiden7 they said she wasn’t allowed to do heavy work. On top of that she’s weak, and nursing the child has exhausted her, which in my view is a reason for forgiving her great lack of activity. 
   I held this letter back for a few days. Pa wrote me a letter in the meantime. My main intention in writing the letter to Pa that you read at home8 was that both Pa and you would know that if I rarely write home it’s because that’s the simplest thing as long as there are reasons for preferably not referring to this and that. However, because there was the issue of my not being sufficiently confiding, I wanted to show that I wasn’t trying to conceal my motives or anything like that, but understood myself that it was better to be silent about a great deal. I don’t believe that Pa saw that in my letter. Anyway, that makes no difference. He’s taken it more as a complaint by me or a request for advice — and that was not the tone of my letter, which was simply a statement of my motives for doing as I do, so that no doubt would be left as to my openness.  To which I hope you won’t object, given how things are, given the necessity of advancing, given that we’ve thought about it — given my intention to stay with her if possible, namely if she herself doesn’t make it absolutely impossible — to which, I say, I hope you won’t object if my immediate decision for now is — to push ahead with the move to Drenthe. Whether the woman comes along or not depends on her. i know she’s consulting her mother. I don’t know what about. Nor do I ask.  So right up to the last, very last moment of leaving she can come up with this or that, which she doesn’t say now.  But if she wants to come, well, let her come. To abandon her would be to drive her back into prostitution; the same hand that tried to help her out of it could not do that, could it?
   In my view, Drenthe is the best thing we can do both for the work and for economizing, and I think that you see it that way too. So however she may be for the moment, we’ll press on with carrying out that plan, if you approve. On leaving I’ll say to the woman: are you coming or are you staying? If she comes, then I believe I’ll have more influence over there, and be able to make her stronger.  Today I’m sending a number of studies to C.M. I’m still very pleased with your revised opinion of the work. Your revised opinion agrees with Rappard’s. Van der Weele also thinks that my work has something. For my part I believe that there’s a period of doing rubbish in the life of every painter, and I believe that in my case that was some considerable time ago. Also that I’m making gradual but steady progress, and that later, through better work, there will come a reflection about what I’m doing now which will make it clearer that even now it already has an element of simplicity and truth and, because you say it yourself, of a manly approach and perception. So, if you find something in a study, you won’t have to take back what you find in it, and later, better work won’t make you entirely cool towards it. Weissenbruch said something similar to me last year — you carry on quietly, and when you’re old you’ll look back calmly on your earliest studies. Now, however, painting a lot isn’t something that may not be postponed. That, and being steeped once more in the serenity of nature in a heath area — have no doubt — will bring us to victory in the end, and to progress from one month to another.  I’ve been rather busy painting in the last few days, again I have studies from the woods mainly. Regards, and write soon.  Ever yours,  Vincent It will be the same with the painted studies as with the drawn ones. Later, when I’ve found more, it will be seen that there’s already a certain personal character in this figure or that fragment of landscape. Anyway, if everything goes according to plan I hope to be sending you studies from Drenthe this autumn.  My dear Theo, Accept my thanks for your letter and the enclosure. I want to answer it today. What you write may be true — as we’ve already discussed — as I’ve thought to myself more than once, both before and since then — that if the woman were obliged to do without me — to stand on her own feet — she would follow a straighter course. Since she has 2 children, however, it’s a very difficult case, but what can I say? In the given situation it’s something that she herself makes necessary, and the circumstances make much more necessary. I underline this last. Do you know what I’ve done? Today I had a quiet day with her — talked with her about it at great length — explained fully what my position was and how I must go for my work and must have a year with few outgoings and earn something to make up for what had passed, which had been rather too much for me. That I foresaw that if I stayed with her, I soon wouldn’t be able to help her any more and would then get into debt again here, where it’s expensive, and be unable to get out of it. So in short she and I must be sensible and part as friends. That she’d have to get her family to take the children in, and that she must go into service. Well, it’s so clear that it’s impossible for me to carry on here that she too understands. And so our agreement is that, both of us being in a fix at the moment, and making it worse by staying together, we’ll separate for a while or forever, depending on how things turn out. I say ‘or forever’ because we have reasons for having to live nonetheless, she in her children and I in my work, and shall have to do things we don’t like — and shall perhaps not be able to be as good as we would wish.
   I said to her, you may not be able to manage by going entirely straight, but go as straight as possible, I too shall go as straight as possible, but be assured in advance that I’ll do far from well in life. So I say, as long as I know that you’re doing your best and not letting everything go and are good to the children, just as you know I too have been good to them — as long as you behave in a way that the children still find a Mother in you, even if you’re only a poor maidservant, even if you’re only a poor whore — in my eyes you are and will remain good, with the whole damned host of faults. And I, though I don’t doubt for a moment that I have similarly attractive points, will be no different, I hope, from how I was, in that I won’t be able to see a woman with a big belly or in a stew without drawing my own conclusions about it and doing what I can if she crosses my path. If you were in the same state, I say, as when I found you, you would have a home with me — a shelter from the storm — as long as I had a crust of bread and a roof, but it isn’t like that now and the storm has passed, I believe you can now make a straight path for your feet1 without me. Well, you must try. For my part I’ll also make a straight path for my feet, I must work hard, and you should too. That’s how I talked about it.
   Ah, brother, you see that we wouldn’t have parted if we didn’t have to. I repeat, we wouldn’t have parted if we didn’t have to. Haven’t we forgiven each other’s faults time after time and made up again? We know each other so well that we can’t think each other bad. I don’t know whether it’s love, but what there is between us is between us. As regards having to. You see, I don’t want to lapse into scraping by, I want to keep on working, straight ahead — vigorously — do what must be done by way of painting. I know that it can’t be wrong to do that — that’s to say, I don’t know how it will turn out for her or for me if I keep on working hard, but it will certainly turn out better if I keep hewing away on my own, if need be, than if we both lapse into stagnation by staying together when we get in each other’s way. I come back now to Drenthe. Think about whether you see a way for me to get money to go there on my own. If need be, I imagine, I can leave the furniture here, and rent a corner of an attic somewhere from my landlord. But first I want to be rid of the burden of my house rent, the sooner the better, you understand, and I want to go over there, the sooner the better. I need it to make progress. Drenthe, Katwijk, Brabant, I don’t mind. To stay for a time with a farmer or someone, far, far away in the country, far enough away for nature there to be real. And then I must paint a lot and be able to spend a little more on painting materials. I discussed everything again with Van der Weele. He spent an afternoon at the studio and saw my studies one by one. Together we repainted several of them to show me some things to do with technique. Anyway, he showed me some useful things. Also, before I go, in the next few days in other words, he’ll give some more of his time to tell me a thing or two.
   Wisselingh, too, came for a morning. Very pleasant — he said I had got further than he expected. We had coffee together and talked about old times. He gave me great encouragement, and Van der Weele did too. But there’s no getting away from painting. I must — let me say it plainly for once — try to paint about a hundred substantial studies. You see, persevering with them. And these studies must be practical subjects too. Fragments of nature with character. Wisselingh will take something from me now and again, perhaps soon, and I’ve agreed with him that as early as this autumn or towards the winter, anyway when I’ve been in the country for a while, I hope to send him something. And to continue doing that. So that he’ll be abreast of what I’m doing, whether or not he takes anything. I said to him, write to me about what I send you, and then I’ll continue in the genre that you think you can do something with. As for C.M., I sent him more than 20 studies, so I don’t think he’ll be dissatisfied — moreover, he can exchange them later. Given that you have nothing to spare, I would ask you to consider putting the case to him — that it would be good if I could go to the country and do a lot of painting. That we’ll try to manage without his aid, but that when necessary it would be such a help if he didn’t stay out of it completely in future. You see, there’s a possibility that we’ll now be able to manage with the usual and still be able to do what the work demands, in painting as well. At a farmer’s in Drenthe one pays about 1 guilder a day for board and lodging. I would like to keep an eye on the woman in the beginning as far as I can, and contribute something, but still the care will be reduced, and the studio will have to be given up for a time. The things stored in a corner of an attic until better times. And then without baggage, without company, off on an excursion to study. Write to me soon and tell me what you think about one thing and another, I want you to write immediately when you’ve read this and say what you think about one thing and another. For my part, I’m going to give my landlord notice tomorrow and arrange to store my things somewhere here, if need be. The woman is going to look for a position in service. And meanwhile I do what work I can. As for a plan of where to go, I’ll wait for your letter, and after that we’ll see what we can do. I hope it will be a way of getting back on my feet. Adieu, old chap, I wish you the very best, I hope the business prospers. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, I received your letter just now when I came home from the dunes behind Loosduinen, soaking wet because I had spent 3 hours in the rain at a spot where everything was Ruisdael, Daubigny or Jules Dupré. I came back with a study of crooked, windswept trees, and a second of a farm after the rain. Everything is already bronze, everything is what one can see in nature only at this time of year, or if one stands before one of those paintings like a Dupré, for instance, and so beautiful that one’s imagination always falls short of it. You write about your walk to Ville-d’Avray that Sunday, at the same time on that same day I was also walking alone, and I want to tell you something about that walk, since then our thoughts probably crossed again in some degree. I spoke to the woman as I wrote to you — we felt that staying together in the future was ruled out, indeed that we’d make each other unhappy, but we felt on both sides how strongly we were attached to each other. And then I went out of doors, a long way away, to talk to nature for a while.  Well, I came to Voorburg, and went from there to Leidschendam.  You know the landscape there, superb trees full of majesty and serenity beside green, dreadful, toy-box summer-houses, and every absurdity the lumbering imagination of Hollanders with private incomes can come up with in the way of flower-beds, arbours, verandas. Most of the houses very ugly, but some old and elegant. Well, at that moment, high above the meadows as endless as the desert, came one driven mass of cloud after the other, and the wind first struck the row of country houses with their trees on the opposite side of the waterway, where the black cinder road runs. Those trees, they were superb, there was a drama in each figure I’m tempted to say, but I mean in each tree. Then, the whole was almost finer than those windblown trees seen on their own, because the moment was such that even those absurd summer houses took on a singular character, rain-soaked and dishevelled. In it I saw an image of how even a person of absurd forms and conventions, or another full of eccentricity and caprice, can become a dramatic figure of special character if he’s gripped by true sorrow, moved by a calamity. It made me think for a moment of society today, how as it founders it now often appears like a large, sombre silhouette viewed against the light of reform. Yes, for me the drama of a storm in nature, the drama of sorrow in life, is the best. A ‘paradou’4 is beautiful, but Gethsemane is more beautiful still.
   Oh, there must be a little bit of air, a little bit of happiness, but chiefly to let the form be felt, to make the lines of the silhouette speak. But let the whole be sombre.  I must say that the woman is bearing up well. She feels sorrow and I do too, but she isn’t despondent and is making an effort.  I bought a piece of cloth recently to make some study linen for myself, and now I’ve given it to her for vests for those scrawny children. And I’m having clothes of mine altered for them so that they’ll get one or two things, and she’s busy with that.  When I say we are separating as friends, that is true — but we are definitely separated, and I’ve since been more at peace with that than I expected, because what was wrong with her was of such a nature that it would have been fatal both for me and for her if we’d been bound to each other, given that one is responsible, so to speak, for each other’s failings. But I’m still left with the worry — how will she be in a year’s time? I’ll certainly not take her into my house again, but I didn’t want to lose touch with her, because I love her and the children too much. That is also possible, precisely because it was and still is something different from a passion. I hope the Drenthe plan goes ahead. You ask what I might need. I don’t need to tell you that I intend to do a lot of work, I must do that to revitalize myself. And over there they have nothing in the way of painting equipment, so as regards taking a supply, taking things that are really useful, definitely the more the better. Good tools are never a waste, and they pay for themselves even if they are expensive. And to get ahead one must do a great deal of painting. I hope to lose very little of the time that I’ll spend there, and to have a lot of models too, which will probably be cheap enough there. But life is cheap there, and I’ll be able to do more with the 150 francs than here.
   But in fact I can5 arrange all that as it suits me. I would think it desirable to be able to make one big purchase, because I lack many things that others have and that are actually indispensable. My plan is to get a long way with painting in Drenthe so that I’ll be eligible for the Drawing Society when I come back. That, in turn, is linked to a second plan, to go to England. I believe that it’s permissible to speculate provided one doesn’t do it in the air or on foundations that are all too shaky. As far as England is concerned, I certainly expect to sell something more easily there than here — that’s true — so I think of England from time to time. But I don’t know how the point that I’ve reached stands in relation to the English art lovers, and because I don’t know that I would first like to have a small, positive beginning of sales here before I think it advisable to take steps over there. If I begin to sell a few things here, then I shan’t hesitate for a moment but start sending things over there or go there. Yet as long as I sell absolutely nothing here, I would very likely be mistaken as to the timing if I didn’t have the wisdom to wait until I see just a beginning here. I hope you find this idea reasonable, that would reassure me. For in England people are very serious once they begin; whoever finds favour in England finds loyal friends there. I need only mention E. Frère and Henriette Browne, for example, who are now just as well liked as on the first day their work was seen there. But if one wants to succeed over there, one must take a little care and be certain that one can be productive in what one sends over there.  Your letter pleased me greatly, for I see that you think that there’s something in the Drenthe plan, and that’s enough for me; later on it will become clear of itself what benefit there is to be gained. But for me it’s already linked directly to becoming a member of the Drawing Society and also to England — because I know for sure that the subjects from over there will be sympathetically received in England if I’m able to put some sentiment into them. In short, press on with Drenthe, whether we can spend a great deal or a little for the time being.
   I’ll go there when I have the money to travel, even though I have few painting materials left, because the time of autumnal effects has already begun, and I hope to capture some of them. Yet I hope I’ll be able to give the woman a little more for the early days. But if I can leave I shall. I say to you that for the time being I plan to help the woman a little, I may not and indeed cannot make it very much. I’m telling no one else but you about this. And what I say to you — that whatever happens to her I cannot and shall not have her in my house again — you can rely on that, for it’s not in her to do what she should do. I also sent a few words to Pa to say that I was separated from her, but that my letter to Pa about staying with her and getting married remained a fact all the same, and that Pa had talked around that and given no answer to the real question, a second fact. I don’t know how it will appear in years to come, or whether that wouldn’t have been better than separating; now we’re too close to everything to see things in their true context and the consequences. I hope that it will all turn out for the best, but her future and my own look sombre to me. I do believe that something will still awaken in her, but that’s precisely the point — it ought to have been awakened already, and now it will be difficult for her to follow her better thoughts when she has no one to support her in that. Now she wouldn’t listen, then she will yearn to speak to me and it won’t be possible. As long as she was with me, she had no contrasting example, and now in other surroundings she’ll remember things that she didn’t care about and paid no attention to at the time. Now, because of the contrast, she’ll think about that sometimes. For me it’s sometimes thoroughly distressing that we both feel the impossibility of struggling through the future together, and yet that we’re so attached. She has been more confiding than normal of late, and the mother had incited her to play some tricks which she didn’t want to inflict on me. Things of the kind we talked about when you were here, such as starting a row and the like. You see, there’s something in her like the beginning of something more solid, and may that remain so. I wish she could marry, and when I tell you that I’ll keep an eye on her it’s because I advised her to do that. If only she can find a man who is half good, that’s enough, then the beginnings of what has come into her here will develop further, that is, a more domestic, simple disposition, and if she sticks to that I won’t have to leave her entirely to her fate in the future either, for then at least I’ll remain her friend, and sincerely so. Write to me again soon, and regards. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’m adding a few words here. You ask what I need. I thought about that and it’s impossible for me to say what I really regard as necessary, for that would be no small amount, so let’s see what’s within our reach and make do with that. What’s within our reach will probably remain below what’s fundamentally needed, but in life it’s already something if one can carry out one’s plans in part. And I for one say to you that I’ll make do with what you can spare.  Life is cheaper over there, and I’ll be able to make savings automatically compared to here. And when a year has passed I’ll have made substantial progress through those savings alone. I can have paint &c. sent by parcel post when I’m over there. So I’ll take a supply if I can, that goes without saying, but if I can’t I shan’t postpone the journey because of that.  I have hopes that the past year will turn out to have been solid, for I haven’t neglected my work and, on the contrary, I’ve strengthened a number of weak points. There are more that need strengthening, of course, but it’s their turn now.   As for what I wrote to you in a previous letter, that the woman had immediately broken certain promises, that was bad enough, namely an attempt to be a maid in a whorehouse, an opportunity the mother had fished out and urged on her. The woman herself immediately regretted it and has rejected it, but all the same it’s very, very weak of her, and especially to do it at that particular time, but that’s what she’s like — up to now at least — so far she hasn’t had the strength to refuse such a thing with an absolute no. Anyway, she forces me to take measures that I’ve often previously postponed and postponed.  On this occasion, though, I saw something in her as if it had been a crisis — I hope a ‘thus far and no further’. And so it is that she herself views this separation as possibly turning out for the best in the end.  And because there’s an all too fatal rapport between her and her mother, those two must go together down the wrong or the right road.
   And it will come down to living with the mother and going out to work together by turns, and trying to get by in an honest way. That’s their plan, and they already have some workdays, and I’ve placed advertisements, and they look every day and are beginning to enjoy it.  I’ll keep on doing that and carry on with advertisements as long as necessary, and in short all the things whereby I can be of use or assistance. And if I can I’ll pay several weeks’ rent for them when I go, as well as a loaf a day or some such to give them yet more time to set their plan up properly and add to it. But the fact that I intend to give them that is something I haven’t yet promised them, because I don’t know myself if I’ll be able to do it. I’ll act according to circumstances.  And I firmly recommend to her a marriage of convenience with a widower or someone, to which I add that she’ll have to be better for such a person than she was for me.  And that she herself knows well enough in what ways she fell short with me, that now she must be wise and learn from that that I don’t blame her in the least, because I know that an improvement or reform doesn’t succeed all at once but has steps, so to speak, and so, provided she stays at the point where she is now and works her way up, starting from there, without allowing herself any relapse, she needn’t take her mistakes with me to heart or become despondent, just try to make amends by being better for someone else.  And she herself well understands these things for the present, and I hope to keep them alive. Becoming despondent and then letting oneself go is, however, a weakness they share, yet at the same time they’re also patient when it comes to starting afresh, the woman in particular is showing that more, and I, although her faults are many and troublesome enough, yet I know that fundamentally there’s something good that extenuates everything, and for that reason, too, I don’t despair of her future. That misericorde must lie in nature itself for such a person is something I wish I could fully believe, and I find it wicked of myself that I’m not fully persuaded of it, in so far as I’m not yet able to resign myself to everything, however, and can’t, for the time being at least, give up everything that I’ve struggled so hard to put right.  Write to me again soon, won’t you? My dear Theo, I couldn’t yet go into detail about my plans in my last letter, but now I can in some respects. I’ll begin my telling you that I now know for certain that one thing and another that I already suspected as regards the woman is true — that recently she was negotiating about her future even before I’d come to the decision to separate. I had to decide to separate, precisely because I was almost as certain of that then as I am now that I know more exactly what the plans were.  Having taken the decision, I wanted to go ahead with my travel plans without delay.  The first measure to be taken was to give notice to the landlord — that has now been done.  The second measure is what to do with my things, which would be an encumbrance and lead to costs at a time of not knowing exactly where I’ll stay for long. They’ll stay here in this house in the attic, since I’ve agreed this with my landlord. You will ask, do I have plans to come back to The Hague then? No.  But in, say,  1/2  a year or 1 year 
   I may have to get in touch with some painters here, when I’ve got much further, when I have a batch of studies of the real countryside.  And then for a while I’ll probably take a room or rather an annexe well suited for use as a studio from the same landlord1 in his own house in VOORBURG, not in The Hague, which will be much cheaper for me than living here in the city, which I shan’t readily do again. So I’m relieved of superfluous encumbrances, and know at once where to head for if I reach a point (certainly not for the time being, of course, but say in 1 year) when a temporary return here would be feasible. Why? — because, for instance, by that time I might be able to become a member of the Drawing Society, just to mention one thing. Which is one of the things I might desire and could achieve then. You’ll agree with me that The Hague is a very remarkable place. It really is the centre of the art world in Holland, and at the same time the surroundings are varied and extremely beautiful, so that one can always work there.
   And so — though certainly not for the time being — after a period of 1 year, say, there will probably be a reason for being here for a brief or a longer stay. And through this arrangement regarding my things I stay in touch with someone who knows me and so can at any rate find me a place to live, if I ask.  So I’m a free man without encumbrances, I can leave when I like.  And I can now do more with the 150 francs from you than when so much had to come out of it. And because I have some relief from worries that were nerve-racking. The travel costs are made much simpler in this way.  The only ‘drawback’, ‘disadvantage’ or whatever you want to call it is that, for my part, I really did have hope that the woman would turn out all right in Drenthe, and now have grave doubts about that. It’s certainly her own behaviour that made me decide to act, but if I’d been able to find the means I’d have taken her to Drenthe nonetheless, in a final attempt for her.  Well, I had to decide, because every week of delay got me more entangled in thorns here, without any progress with her.  If I took my things, a 1/2 wagon to Drenthe would certainly cost something more than 25 guilders, according to a revised calculation by Van Gend & Loos, because there’s also the cost of delivering to and collecting from home, although this isn’t all that much.  Well, some packing cases would be needed, which I would have to buy, and that’s another expense.  It would have been convenient to have my things, but it works out too expensive, and especially if one moved about over there.
   I would first like to have a look at Katwijk, to do some sea studies, and because that at any rate is within reach, even if the journey to Drenthe has to wait a while on account of the money.  Oh, Theo, you’ll understand my feelings in recent days, a great melancholy about the woman and the children, but it couldn’t be otherwise — at the same time all my thoughts are about work and I’m really eager, because now I can do things which would have been impossible for me otherwise.  Dear brother — if you could feel precisely what I’m feeling, and how I’ve devoted a piece of myself, so to speak, to the woman, namely forgetting everything else and concentrating on getting her back on her feet — if you could feel precisely a kind of sadness about life, which doesn’t, however, make me indifferent to it, on the contrary, I would rather have my sorrow about one thing and another than forget or become indifferent — if you could feel precisely the extent to which I draw my serenity from worship of sorrow4 and not from illusion — perhaps even for you brother, my inner self would be very different and more detached from life than you can now imagine. I’ll certainly not say much more about the woman, but I’ll still continue to think about her often. From the beginning, with her, it was a question of all or nothing when it came to helping. I couldn’t give her money to live on her own before, I had to take her in if I was to do anything of use to her. And in my view the proper course would have been to marry her and take her to Drenthe. But, I admit, neither she herself nor circumstances allow it. She isn’t kind, she isn’t good, but neither am I, and serious attachment existed throughout everything as we were.  I need to work and I also need you to write soon. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve got so far with packing &c. that I’ll leave as soon as I have the travel money. It’s best in the circumstances that I set to work straightaway. For during the removals &c. one can’t do anything good in the way of work, and I shan’t get back into my stride until I’m somewhere in the country. So I hope to be able to get away if you send something towards the 10th, if I can’t go straight through I’ll stay in a village close by for a day or two if need be.  I hope things will turn out as you think possible, indeed as I do too, more or less, that it will make the woman change direction for the better. Yet I fear that won’t happen and she’ll go down the old road.  If I judge by my intimate knowledge of her, she’s too weak in spirit and willpower in particular to continue on a proper course. When I talked about it during your visit I was determined to decide, but in my view there were two roads, and the decision as to how depended more on her than on me. If she had definitely wanted to carry on with me, so that it was something more than words and a turning away from those faults that had made the situation impossible, I believe that it would have been a better lot for her than that awaiting her now, however difficult and poor things might have been for us. But I saw in her something like a sphinx that cannot say either yes or no. And if you were to ask me if I knew what she’s going to do, all I know is this, ‘certainly not as straight as she could have done’.  In recent days I again saw clearly how looking at the advertisements was done merely for the sake of appearances, and that they’re probably waiting for my departure before embarking on something they don’t discuss with me.  All the more reason for me to leave immediately, for 
   otherwise they’d resort to delaying things deliberately. And the mother again has a hand in this. This plan, which is again a twisting of what they began a few days ago, will almost certainly lead to nothing but wretchedness.  But I would have to be mad to help when they’re not being open with me, wouldn’t I? So I intend simply to leave and to let fourteen days or so go by. Then I’ll write to them and see how things are.  I’m also beginning to think that I must leave in order to make them be serious. But such a test is dangerous, for even in a short time they can spoil a great deal.  Why, why is the woman so unwise? She’s what Musset has called ‘A child of the age’1 through and through — and I sometimes think of the ruin of Musset himself when I consider her future.  There was something elevated in Musset; well, in her there’s also a je ne sais quoi, although she’s certainly not an artist. If only she were, a little. She has her children, and there’ll be something solid in her if they become her idée fixe even more than they are now, but that too isn’t what it should be, even though her mother love, although imperfect, is still the best thing in her character, in my view.  It’s a difficult thing for me that I assume that, once I am gone, she’ll regret a few things and want to be better and will need me. I’m ready to help in that case, but I’ll get into her head what you told me about the woman you met, you found me when I had sunk very low, I must climb up again. Instead of I must climb up again, she 
   will say the abyss draws me.  I once heard that there was a relationship between Musset and George Sand. George was composed, positive, highly industrious. Musset was nonchalant, indifferent, and even neglected his work.  Things came to a head and a separation between these two characters. Later a desperate attempt by Musset and remorse, but not before he had sunk still deeper into the mire, and in the meantime George Sand had got her affairs in order and was completely absorbed in a new work, and said ‘it’s too late, it’s impossible now’.  But these are so much questions of inner conflict, and hearts shrink more in pain because of them than appears. Theo, when I leave I shan’t leave feeling easy about her — on the contrary, uneasy — because I fear so much that she won’t wake up until it’s too late, not have a keen desire for something simpler and purer until the moment for attaining it has passed.  When I see that sphinx-like quality in her, I recognize it of old both in her and in others, and it’s a very bad sign. Then staring melancholically into the abyss is fatal too, and the way to make that go away is hard work. And now — Theo — she’s again too passively resigned to things — well, melancholy, if it can be overcome, must be overcome by toil, and whoever doesn’t feel that is lost for ever and will go straight to the dogs. I’ve told her this, even got a little of it into her at times.  You see, she’s on the edge, isn’t she?  It shan’t be my hand that pushes her in, but nor can I stand beside her forever, holding her back. A person must have enough common sense to cooperate when he is warned and helped.
   I know, there are cases where the melancholic appears to be unwilling, but later quietly does what he must and recovers. If she’s like that, then that’s fine and she’ll be all right.  The melancholic is helped by nothing more — in the period of recovery — than by a friend. That’s a great deal then, even if the friend is poor. Well, she’ll continue to find that in me — even if now it’s true that she has been and is at times extremely nasty — of course nonetheless. She’ll need a support, and I’ll still be that support even though I am gone, provided I see a little energy and good will. The people who tried to turn her away from me (in her family) did something that would be as bad as murdering her and her children if it weren’t that they did it in their obduracy and stupidity. For without that she’d be much further along.  Do your best towards the tenth to send me enough for me to be able to leave if need be, because this would be wise.  All the same, don’t put yourself in difficulties for I’ll act according to the circumstances and write to you straightaway to say what I’ve done.  If it’s too little for Drenthe I’ll go to Loosduinen for a day or so and wait there. I’ve found splendid things in Loosduinen, old farmhouses, and the effects in the evening are superb there. In that case I would probably send my things ahead or put them in storage.  But it’s also just the moment at which I can conveniently end the tenancy, and when your letter comes I’ll leave here. That will be a sign for the woman that she must persevere. I’ll place more advertisements, but these last two days it was idling about again, and I fear they’ve changed the plan fundamentally. Adieu, Theo, I wish things were already sorted out, for days like these are difficult and little good to anyone. I wish you well and good fortune, believe me Ever yours, Vincent I hope you haven’t fallen ill, I also had diarrhoea a while ago but it stopped. Eggs may be the best thing for strengthening the stomach, at least if weakness is the cause.  My dear Theo, I’ve just received your letter and the 100 francs enclosed. And I leave tomorrow for Hoogeveen in Drenthe. Then on from there, and from there I’ll give you an address.  So don’t write any more to here in any event. And I would suggest you write a word to C.M. right away to inform him of my departure because, as you say yourself, there’s the possibility that he might write to me at this address. If he has already done so, it would be best if he asked at the post office for the letter to be returned for, not knowing exactly what my next address will be, I can only inform the post here or the landlord later on.  Friend Rappard is also travelling, and already has Drenthe behind him and is nearly on Terschelling. He wrote to me from Drenthe ‘the country here is very earnest in mood, the figures often made me think of studies by you. As for life here, one could certainly not live more cheaply anywhere else. And I think that the south-east corner (the area I have in mind) is the most original.’1
   Theo, I certainly have a feeling of melancholy on leaving, much more so than would have been the case had I been convinced that the woman would be energetic and that her good will wasn’t in doubt. Anyway, you know the gist from one thing and another. For my part I must press on or I myself will sink without getting her any further by that. Until she becomes more active of her own accord, namely more steadily instead of in short bursts, she’ll remain on the same inadequate spot, and even if she had 3 helpers in my place they wouldn’t be able to do anything about it unless she herself cooperated. But the children to whom one’s heart goes out? I couldn’t do everything for them, but if only the woman had been willing! I shan’t go on moaning, though, for I must press on nonetheless.  Well, to be on the safe side I didn’t dare to take paint along, for over there I’ll soon have to pay for my things when they arrive, then lodgings and more travel expenses. But if we’re lucky enough to get something from C.M., I’ll have one or two things I’ve picked out sent there by parcel post. The sooner that can be done the better. So if you hear anything, write to me as soon as you know my address over there, and of course I agree with the proposed arrangement (regarding the partial reimbursement of the 100 francs); indeed, if you’re hard up, wait for a favourable moment before sending everything that might come from him. I, for one, think that C.M. might just do nothing at all.  In any event, brother, it was firm and well advised of you to send this immediately. For now I’ll be over there and able to get my bearings, and we 
   can certainly economize ourselves even if no help comes. So thanks for this, and I believe it’ll prove to be a good step. My plan is to stay there until you come to Holland next year, for instance. I wouldn’t want to miss you then. But in that way I would just see all the seasons go by and have a general view of the character of things in that region.  I’ve equipped myself with an internal passport, valid for 12 months. With which I have the right to go where I will and to stay in one place for as long or as short as I please.  So I’m very glad that I can make progress, for in this way we help ourselves; over there I reckon 50 francs for board and lodging and the rest on the work, and that’s a big difference from what I was able to do here in the circumstances. So even if others won’t help, we won’t be idle.  Regards, for I still have a lot to arrange today — write a short letter to C.M. — and in the next few days you’ll receive a message with my address, by tomorrow evening if all goes well. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent You wrote to me recently ‘perhaps your duty will induce you to behave differently or something’. That’s something I immediately thought about a great deal, and because my work so undoubtedly demands the step of going there, it’s my understanding that work is more directly duty than even the woman, and that the former mustn’t suffer for the sake of the latter. Which was different last year, since in my view I’m now exactly at the point of Drenthe. But one has divided feelings and would like to do both, which cannot be in the circumstances, both because of the money and, more than that, because she can’t be counted on.  Hoogeveen, Tuesday evening. My dear Theo, I’ve just arrived here. I saw some beautiful bits of the Veluwe region1 from the train, but by the time we reached these parts everything was dark, so I don’t know what it’s like yet. Anyway, am sitting in a large taproom like the ones in Brabant, where a woman is sitting peeling potatoes, quite an interesting little figure. I’ve been talking to people here, and in a day or two I’ll take the barge and travel all the way down the Hoogeveense Vaart through the peat bogs, right across the south-east corner of Drenthe. Then, northwards from here it seems that there’s magnificent heathland all the way to Assen. I’m certainly curious, as you can imagine. Everything went well in The Hague. That surveyor3 came to the station to see me. The woman and her children were with me until the last minute, of course, and the parting wasn’t very easy when I left. I’ve provided for her as best I could, but she’ll have a difficult time. I’ve brought very little paint with me, but some anyway, and I hope to be able to get more soon. I found the colour of the Veluwe rich.
   I hope to await your next letter here, this is a country lodging-house near the station. Address the letter care of A. Hartsuiker, lodging-house keeper at Hoogeveen. After that, though, I may go deeper into the countryside, but I’ll wait until I have a little stock of paint. Well, more soon; at the moment I haven’t seen anything apart from what I’ve told you, the fields out of the train window and the taproom here, which is nothing out of the ordinary. In any case I wanted to let you know that I’m here. Regards, I’ll set out tomorrow. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent As soon as you receive this be so good as to pop a postcard or something in the post to see if it arrives all right. Got up early this morning because I was really curious. The weather was marvellous, the air is clear and sparkling, like it is in Brabant.
   At the lodgings here I saw a barn that’s laid out differently from the ones in Brabant. I may make something of it later, if I stay here, at least. Well, the fields around here are mostly meadowland, with small trees here and there. I think I’ve done well in making Hoogeveen my base. At least it’s nice that I heard on the very first evening that I can go by barge right through the whole peat district as far as the Prussian border and the Zwarte Meer. I’ll write soon to tell you a lot more about it than today. I’ll set out on this journey as soon as I have some more paint, and will go from one hamlet or village to another. However this remains the address, and I’m leaving my things here for the time being, even if I’m away for some time and don’t know myself exactly where I’ll be. I’ve agreed to pay 1 guilder a day here, while I’m here, that is, and between times I can leave my suitcase &c. in the attic.
   In the village harbour I saw really authentic peat barges and the figures of bargemen. Women wearing the local costume in the hayfield — fine. It will probably be even more beautiful deeper into the countryside, but meanwhile I’m already seeing very good things — even here. So write a few words soon. As I said, to the address 

 
A. Hartsuiker


 
lodging-house keeper at Hoogeveen

 The village or town here is mainly one long row of houses by the harbour, many new houses and a few more beautiful old ones.  My dear Theo, Now that I’ve been here for a few days and have walked around a good deal in different directions, I can tell you more about the region I’ve fetched up in. I enclose a scratch after my first painted study from this part of the world, a hut on the heath. A hut made of nothing but sods of turf and sticks. I’ve also seen inside about 6 of this type, and more studies of them will follow. I can’t more accurately describe the way the exterior looks in the twilight or just after sunset than by reminding you of a particular painting by Jules Dupré which I think belongs to Mesdag, with two huts in it on which the mossy roofs stand out surprisingly deep in tone against a hazy, dusty evening sky. That is here. Well, it’s very beautiful inside these huts, dark as a cave. Drawings by certain English artists who have worked on the moors in Ireland most realistically convey what I observe. A. Neuhuys does the same with somewhat more poetry than strikes one at first, but he makes nothing that isn’t also fundamentally true. I saw superb figures out in the country — striking in their expression of soberness. A woman’s breast, for example, has that heaving motion that is the exact opposite of voluptuousness, and sometimes, if the creature is old or sickly, arouses compassion or else respect. And the melancholy which things in general have is of a healthy kind, as in Millet’s drawings.
   Happily, the men here wear breeches; it shows off the shape of the leg, makes the movements more expressive. To mention one of the many things that gave me something new to see and to feel during my explorations, I’ll tell you how here one sees, for example, barges pulled by men, women, children, white or black horses, loaded with peat, in the middle of the heath, just like the ones in Holland, on the Trekweg at Rijswijk, for instance. The heathland is rich. I saw sheepfolds and shepherds that were more attractive than those in Brabant. The ovens are more or less like the ones in T. Rousseau’s Communal oven;5 stand in the gardens under old apple trees or among the celery and cabbages. Beehives, too, in many places. One can see that many of the people have something wrong with them — it isn’t exactly healthy here, I think — perhaps because of unclean drinking water. I’ve seen some girls of, I would say, 17 or younger who still had something very beautiful and youthful, in their features too, but generally it fades very early. Yet this doesn’t detract from the fine, noble bearing of the figure that some of them have, who prove to be very withered when seen close to.
   There are 4 or 5 canals in the village, to Meppel, to Dedemsvaart, to Coevorden, to Hollandscheveld. If you follow them, you see here and there a curious old mill, farmhouse, shipyard or lock. And always the peat barges coming and going. To give you an example of the authentic character of this region: while I was sitting painting that hut, two sheep and a goat came up and started grazing on the roof of the house. The goat climbed onto the ridge and looked down the chimney. The woman, who heard something on the roof, shot outside and threw her broom at the said goat, which leapt down like a chamois. The two hamlets on the heath where I’ve been and where this incident took place are called Stuifzand and Zwartschaap. I’ve also been in various other places, and now you can imagine how unchanged it still is here, since Hoogeveen is a town after all, and yet nearby there are shepherds, those ovens, those turf huts &c. I sometimes think with great melancholy about the woman and the children, if only they were looked after — oh, it’s the woman’s own fault, 
   one could say, and it would be true, but I fear that her misfortune will be greater than her guilt. I knew from the outset that her character is a ruined character, but I had hopes of her finding her feet and now, precisely when I don’t see her any more and think about the things I saw in her, I increasingly come to realize that she was already too far gone to find her feet. And that just makes my feelings of pity even greater, and it’s a melancholy feeling because it isn’t in my power to do anything about it. Theo, when I see some poor woman on the heath with a child in her arms or at her breast my eyes become moist. I see her in them; her weakness and slovenliness, too, only serve to intensify the likeness. I know that she isn’t good, that I have every right to do what I’m doing, that to stay with her there wasn’t possible, that bringing her with me really wasn’t possible either, that what I did was even sensible, wise, what you will, but that doesn’t alter the fact that it goes right through me when I see some poor little creature, feverish and miserable, and that then my heart melts. How much sadness there is in life. Well, one may not become melancholy, one must look elsewhere, and to work is the right thing, only there are moments when one only finds peace in the realization: misfortune won’t spare me either. Adieu, write soon, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent Dear Theo, Your letter has just come, so I know that the post is working properly. I dropped you a line a couple of days ago to tell you a thing or two about the countryside here. Everything is beautiful here, wherever one goes. The heath is much vaster than it is in Brabant, near Zundert or Etten at least — rather monotonous, particularly when it’s afternoon and the sun’s shining, and yet it’s that very effect, which I’ve already vainly tried to paint several times, that I shouldn’t want to miss. The sea isn’t always picturesque either, but one has to look at those moments and effects as well if one doesn’t want to deceive oneself as to its true character. Then — the heath is sometimes far from pleasant in the heat of midday. It’s as irritatingly tedious and fatiguing as the desert, just as inhospitable, and as it were hostile. Painting it in that blazing light and capturing the planes vanishing into infinity is something that makes one dizzy. So one mustn’t think that it has to be conceived sentimentally; on the contrary it’s almost never that. That same irritatingly tedious spot — in the evening as a poor little figure moves through the twilight — when that vast, sun-scorched earth stands out dark against the delicate lilac tints of the evening sky, and the very last fine dark blue line on the horizon separates earth from sky — can be as sublime as in a J. Dupré. And it’s the same with the figures. The peasants and the women aren’t always interesting, but if one is patient one will nonetheless really see the whole Millet-like quality. Yesterday I came across one of the oddest churchyards I’ve ever seen3 — imagine a patch of heath with a hedge of small, closely planted pines around it — so that one would think that it was an ordinary little pine-wood.
   However, there’s an entrance — a short avenue and then one comes upon a number of graves overgrown with bent-grass and heather. Many of them marked with white posts bearing the names. I’m sending you a croquis of it after the study that I painted of it. I’m working on another study of a red sun between little birches standing in a marshy meadow from which the white evening mist rises; above this one can just see a blue-grey line of trees and a few roofs on the horizon. It’s certainly a pity that you’ve still heard nothing from C.M. Obviously he doesn’t have to do anything, but I think that his never sending a single word in reply is rather rude. But understand one thing clearly — it increasingly appears to me that we’re living in an age when things have become somewhat confused6 (I think that that should be enormously rather than somewhat, but I don’t want to force this opinion on you). As to C.M., like many other people he would be very polite to a stranger, but one only hates one’s friends, and having lost himself rather in focusing his attention on the ebb and flow of commerce and art dealing, he’s so engrossed in fundamentally very abstract things that something that’s very natural, namely that I’ve spoken to him and still speak to him about my affairs, is as disagreeable to him as an open door letting in a draught, because his thoughts are very, very far away — always — and he knows no better than to get himself out of it rather rudely if necessary, just as one slams the draughty door shut.
   You will say, this presumes that he’s rather insensitive. Well, I most certainly do presume that, although I don’t doubt that he really can be very obliging, at least provided he has gathered his thoughts together, and in my case he has not, all the more so because he appears to have certain fixed opinions about me that I don’t believe I may endeavour to dispel. When I write to him it’s in a tone that resounds with, ‘I’m a bad lot, am I not, well then, I don’t say that this is so, but I leave you to believe what you believe, and I say only what I might say if everything was as you suppose’. You will say that this tone is really rather dry — very well — it still makes sense to adopt this tone to some people. If they then don’t even read the few words that one writes to them once a year, if even that’s too much for them — well — so be it — I shan’t resort to any other means though, because I don’t want there to be even the appearance of insistence. And if C.M. didn’t answer me, I can if need be understand that in so far as I say, oh well, it’s as it is and nothing more. Make no mistake — if C.M. does not reply to you though, then I really will hold that against C.M., being an insult to you (to whom he should behave otherwise). And then he’ll fall a very long way in my estimation — nothing more than that.
   I hope to be able to send you studies from here before too long, when I’ve got a few together. And give it some thought, perhaps some of them might be something for Wisselingh. I’m running out of money again, though, and I had actually hoped to be able to lay in some more paint and some tools. But there — we have to cut our coat according to our cloth, although it’s a great shame that there isn’t a little more cloth. That too may be put to rights by continuing to work patiently, and at least it isn’t entirely dependent on C.M. Only I’m very glad that I’m here because, old chap, it is rich here. Yes, I would wish the same for you. I’m really longing to hear something more from you about the woman. Perhaps I understand some things a little, but this one thing above all: I trust and know that you’ve done right by her. As to doing right, our circumstances sometimes make us something other than we would be if there was nothing obstructing our will. As for myself, I would rather have stayed with the woman, although it would have been twice as hard, but as far as I could tell it was impossible in the circumstances. And the way things are, each time I still see her in my imagination as a phantom, it’s not as a reproachful one, but I’m only sad that I didn’t have the means to behave towards her as I’d have wished. Times are hard, and you will have your share of it.
   When I came here I had a number of half-used tubes of paint with me and a few new ones, enough for 6 studies or so, but certainly no more. So I’ll immediately send for something or other with the next money, again for some studies. Otherwise I’m drawing, but you know very well that painting must be the main thing as far as possible. I don’t know what it’s like changing money here. If necessary, if I can’t do it here, I could get it changed in Assen or somewhere, but should you be in a position, for the first two occasions, say — until I know more about how things are here and also have found an office in Assen, where I haven’t yet been — so for the first two occasions could you send, for example, Dutch money or a postal order, that would be good, because otherwise I might not be able to get by. I hope you’ll be able to send something by the 20th — no later — because I paid the people for a week as soon as I got here, so that will be up then and I’ll have to pay again. You’ll find the croquis of the little churchyard on the back. The colour there is quite singular. It’s a beautiful sight to see the real heather on the graves, the scent of turpentine9 has something mystical about it. The dark band of pines that encloses it separates a shimmering sky from the rough ground, which is generally a reddish colour — tawny — brownish — yellowish, but with lilac tints everywhere. It wasn’t easy to paint; I’ll carry on looking for other effects in it. In the snow, for example, it must be very singular.
   I had already heard something about Liebermann, but your description of his brushwork, in particular, is more enlightening. His colour must be infinitely better than Henkes’s (you put it very well, ‘the colour of slate with transitions to grey-yellow and grey-brown’). I understand it perfectly. That, that manner of painting, is wonderful once one has got the hang of it. And the fact that I want to paint a great deal is precisely because I very much want to have something constant and systematic in my brushwork — although I’ve heard many people say that you mustn’t have a system — which he and several others have. I see from your description that he, Liebermann, must work much in Herkomer’s manner, mainly because of consistently carrying through, and analyzing that, those patches of light and shade caused by sunbeams through the foliage, which dazzles many an eye. I recently saw the large engraving after Herkomer, The last muster — you must have seen it too — what virility!11 I’d very much like to see the Jules Breton, A miner’s daughter12 — there’s still a coal-mine in Courrières; when I went there on a rainy day13 the labourers were just going back through the mud, like a caravan of chimney-sweeps, one with an old capote on, I remember; the women, though (at least those that I saw) didn’t wear men’s clothes like they do in the Borinage, where the ‘pit rags’ are the same for all. 
    Well, old chap, your letter will be welcome again. Write just a word to C.M. in any event, at least if you haven’t already done so, that I’m now here in Drenthe alone14, and tell him something of the plans. But if he doesn’t reply to that, then I think it has to be abandoned. Thanks for all your efforts. It’s fine, grey weather this morning; no sun for the first time since I got here, and that will surely be just as beautiful, so I’m going to set out. The people I’m lodging with are very good. The man works on the freight railway, a fellow with something Degroux-like about him, a face that sometimes takes on the colour of red cabbage, a real workhorse. The woman very industrious and tidy. 3 children. I’ll probably get a back attic as a studio. Adieu, brother, my best wishes, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   You know the address is A. Hartsuiker lodging-house keeper Hoogeveen. Dear brother, I’ve just received your letter and thank you right heartily for it. And want to write to you again straightaway to tell you a few things about my experiences. First of all, I’ve had a letter from Rappard in West-Terschelling and he’s hard at work there, having first spent some time here in Drenthe, in Rolde near Assen. I hope to be able to visit him there myself this winter and to make a few more studies; the trip there, as far as I can make out, there and back, being three guilders, unless the crossing to T. should prove difficult. But it would be worth it to be with a painter again, and will break the isolation. I’m longing to get your next letter, which I hope won’t get stuck in the pen. Don’t forget to tell me the outcome regarding C.M., whether you’ve told him that I was here and whether your letter has also gone unanswered. If that’s the case I’ll certainly go and see C.M., not now of course but later, and ask him to explain why he didn’t reply. I shan’t write, but I’m unshakeably determined that I shall not put up with his not answering, particularly not answering you, and since this is part of it, also his not answering me. I’ve NEVER SAID that he must do something, nor do I now. I count what he did or might do as a favour, and as such something for which I’ve always thanked him, and for my part have also given him studies, certainly 50 altogether, with the right to swap them later. And all this being so, I certainly don’t have to tolerate any insults, and it is a gross insult that I haven’t even had word that he received the last packet of studies. Not a syllable. And should your letter remain unanswered on top of this, it would be cowardice to leave it at that, and I must and shall demand an explanation. Which, as said, I shall most certainly do, and in a personal visit, even though some time may elapse. If he isn’t willing to talk to me then, that would by no means finish the matter, because my mind is made up that I shall have satisfaction about it. Should he give it me, well and good, but should he refuse to give it me (I haven’t used a single impolite term to him, I’ve only written in a very cool tone), should, I say, he refuse to give it me, I may say an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and insult him roundly back, which I would do in cold blood.
   Make no mistake, brother, understand me in this once and for all, however desirable it might be to get financial help — that is far from being No. 1. No. 1 is that he goes too far in losing sight of the rights that I have as a human being, even were I a stranger to him (I never speak of our relationship, nor rely on it), not to be treated as a bad lot, not to be condemned or accused of this or that without being able to speak up for myself. I have the right, every right to demand an answer and to consider silence a very gross insult. I must speak frankly about this because I had hoped until now that it would come right of its own accord, and that I would receive word in reply. But there’s a limit to this silent forbearance and, as I say, beyond that limit it would be cowardly and unmanly of me not to protest four-square against it. So I ask you kindly, simply to tell me what has happened as regards an answer to your letter; then I’ll know for myself what I must do, then I won’t say another word about it, but even if more than a year were to pass I’ll still find deep inside me, as untarnished, clear and bright as I have at this moment, this same feeling that I must have an explanation, and not rest until I’ve settled matters with him one way or another. I think that you’ll appreciate my feelings, and would do so all the more if you knew precisely what occurred between him and me in years past. When I was very dubious about the plan to study, whether the promise to bring that about was straightforward and well-considered — I thought then that they made the plan too hastily and I went along with it too hastily, and in my view it remains an excellent thing that it stopped when it did, which I deliberately brought about myself, contriving it such that the shame of giving up fell on me and not on anyone else. You know that I, who have learned other languages, could have managed to master that miserable little bit of Latin &c., but I said I couldn’t cope. This was an excuse, because I didn’t want to tell my protectors that I regard the whole University (or at least the Theology Faculty) as an unspeakable mess, a breeding-ground for Pharisees.
   I tried to prove that I didn’t lack courage by going to the Borinage, where life was most certainly much harder for me than it would have been had I become a student. I thought that C.M., for example, might have understood me better, and have all the more reason to believe him insensitive when I think how he has treated me with a degree of contempt ever since. Then and now I’ve kept to myself a good many things that I could have said, and if I ever tackle him about them he’ll have to feel a thing or two in his conscience, whatever he may say; how I, neither in the past nor now, have ever committed any base acts against him, so there’s no conceivable reason for this insult of his failure to reply, all the more so since it would have been better if, from the moment when I went to The Hague, all that was in the past had been forgiven and forgotten and we’d resolved to maintain cordial relations, which I discussed with His Hon. at the time. But I do not say, brother, peace at any price, and I would rather have an unpleasant explanation than weakly let things go when doing so would be weak, and it would be now. Be assured, though, that I shall NOT mention you, even though his insult to you, if he doesn’t set it right (it occurs to me that he’s beginning to use something of the same policy towards you) is what’s making me resolved to have it out with His Hon., and I’ve decided to say a great many things to him. I promise you that, I’ll make it appear as if I was talking about myself alone, as if I knew nothing about you. I have the very deepest contempt for this mysterious, sphinx-like silence &c., and I tell you here and now that I think all sorts of things about it, except for something that’s straightforward and honest or true. It may have something to do with the general politics of the day, I know that, but as you know I don’t agree with the general politics of the day because I regard it as base and bearing all the traits of a decline that will end in a new periwig age.
   One could weep about what’s presently being spoiled in all sorts of areas, things to which our predecessors devoted their labours, honestly, are now being mean-spiritedly neglected and abandoned. The times we live in are perhaps outwardly a little more respectable than earlier days, but too much nobleness is being lost for us to be able to expect the same great things of the future that there have been in the past. Well, everyone has to make up his own mind. Now to change the subject — but it was necessary to deal with these matters, although I take not the slightest pleasure in writing about them — namely my experiences here. The more I walk around the area, the more I’m coming to like Hoogeveen itself, and I don’t doubt that this will remain so. If C.M. falls through, which I fear, this doesn’t alter the fact that in the long run it will work out cheaper here than in The Hague. But because of C.M. falling through I’ll have to scrimp and save for a while before I can carry out my plans. And perhaps we’ll lose absolutely nothing by it after all. The fact is that I do need money and a stock of paint and various things before I can expect any results from the trip through the south-east corner of Drenthe. But in six months or so I hope I’ll have saved enough, and in the meantime I’ll still be able to do things here. So for the present I won’t go further away for good, but will stay and work in this area. Will try to save some money for two trips, one through the south-east corner, one across the heath between here and Assen. And I hope to combine the latter trip to the north with a visit to friend Rappard and spend some time in his lodgings on Terschelling, known as ’t Scheepje. It would be too reckless to go on these two trips if one were to undertake them without supplies and without being prepared for the circumstances. But with patience they’re possible, for I see well enough that I have fewer expenses here than in The Hague. And before I begin on that I’d like to pay Rappard his money back, although it may be that later I’ll perhaps borrow something from him again after I’ve seen him, and if I know for sure that I can make something specific with it.
   At first I had some trouble here with models on the heath, where people laughed about it and I was ridiculed and couldn’t finish figure studies that I’d started because of the unwillingness of the models, although I had paid them well, at least for these parts. I stood firm, though, and concentrated on a single family in that same place, where I can now get an old woman, a girl and a man, and have hopes that they’ll remain willing. I have a few studies of the heath, which I’ll send you when they’re thoroughly dry, and have also begun watercolours. And I’ve also started pen drawings again, specifically with a view to painting, because one can go into such details with the pen as painted studies cannot do, and one does well to make two studies, one entirely drawn for the way things are put together, and one painted for the colour. If this can be done, that is, and the occasion permits, this is a way of working up the painted study later.  The heath is rich, and there are marshy meadows that often remind me of T. Rousseau. Well, I can tell you that the open air and the life here are really doing me good. Oh if only the poor woman could have had it — I think of her with such profound sadness — although my common sense tells me quite clearly that it’s impossible now in the circumstances. I’m worried about her because I heard nothing from her, and from that assume that she has been either unwilling or unable to do things that I advised her to do. I can’t even write to her easily, because if she continues to live in Bagijnestraat I know first that my letter will be opened, probably by her brother or her mother, and secondly as long as she lives there I don’t want to have anything to do with it anyway, not even with her. Still, perhaps I’ll hear something yet, but my thoughts will be gloomy if I hear nothing further. I had hoped to get a message from an address other than Bagijnestraat, and that she and her mother had started a little business doing laundry and ironing.
   Oh Theo, if she hadn’t had any family she’d have behaved herself so much better. Women like her really are bad, but first infinitely, I say infinitely, more pitiable than bad, and secondly they have a certain passion, certain warmth which has something so very human that the respectable could learn a lesson, and I for my part understand the words of Jesus, who said to the superficially civilized, the respectable people of His time, ‘the harlots go BEFORE you’. Women like her, they can be fatally bad (I’m not even speaking here of the Nanas, full-blooded and sensual, but of the more nervous, rational temperaments among them), women like her, they fully justify Proudhon’s words, woman is the desolation of the righteous man10 — they don’t care about what we call ‘reason’ and go against it directly and culpably, I know that, but on the other hand they still have that genuine humanity, which means that one may not and cannot do without them, and one feels that there’s good in them and even something almighty good, even though one can’t define it other than ‘I don’t know what makes one love them after all’. Gavarni was serious when he said: I felt something die within me with every woman that I have left. And the most beautiful saying and the best that I know on the question of women is the one that you know too, oh woman whom I could have loved, and one would willingly go into the infinite with that, wanting nothing more than that knowledge.  I know that there are women, absurdly enough (they indeed do even more harm to it than the men), who are wholly governed by ambition etc. — Lady Macbeth is this type14 — these women are fatal, and one must avoid them despite their charm or one becomes a villain and very soon finds oneself faced with terrible evil that one has done and can never put right again — but there was nothing like this in her with whom I was, although she was vain, just as we all are at times. Poor, poor, poor creature is all that I felt at the start and I still feel in the end. Bad? So be it, but who in our times is good? Who feels so pure that he wants to play judge? God forbid. Delacroix would have understood her, I dare say, and God’s misericorde15 will even, I sometimes think, understand her much more, surely. As I wrote to you, the little lad loved me very much, and when I was already sitting in the wagon I still had him on my lap. And so we parted, I believe with inexpressible melancholy on both sides, but nothing more.
   I tell you brother, I’m not good in the way of the ministers, I too, not to mince words, think whores are bad, but I nevertheless feel something human in them that means I don’t have the slightest scruple about consorting with them, I see nothing particularly evil in them, I haven’t the slightest remorse about the acquaintance I have or have had with them. If our society were a pure and ordered one, oh yes, then they were temptresses, now — many times it seems to me they should be regarded more as sisters of charity16 than anything else. And now, as in other periods of the fall of a civilization, the relationships of good and evil are often reversed because of the corruption of society, and one reasonably comes back to the old saying: ‘the first shall be last and the last shall be first’. Like you, I’ve been to Père Lachaise, I’ve seen the graves of men for whom I have indescribable respect; I felt the same respect by the humble little tombstone of Béranger’s mistress, which I visited expressly (if I remember rightly it’s in a little corner behind his), and I also thought there about Corot’s mistress in particular. Such women were silent muses, and I forever, always and everywhere feel the influence of a feminine element in the emotion of these gentle masters, the intimacy, the penetration of their poetry. I’m speaking a bit seriously in this letter, not because I think that Pa’s feelings and views, for instance, are wrong in everything — far from it — you would, for example, do well to follow Pa’s advice in many things — we talked about Pa, you will recall, during your visit and at the moment you left — but something that I felt vaguely then I can now express more clearly, when you speak with Pa, think at the same time of Corot, say, you’ll then automatically avoid some of the extremes into which Pa lapses much too much, and as I see it, on this condition that there’s less stiffness, Pa’s advice is usually good, and I have myself paid heed to it many times. But I point out that Pa and others do not know that besides their upright lives — for Pa’s life is upright — there are other upright lives, more in a milder spirit, in the character of Corot, Béranger, shall I say. You and I also feel that much more in any event. Because Pa and others DO not KNOW THAT, they are frequently and fatally mistaken when judging certain matters. Mistakes along the lines, for example, that C.M. certainly believes that Degroux was a bad man, in which, however sure he is in his belief, he is nonetheless mistaken.
   I’ll now tell you something else to make it clear to you that I’m not speaking in the abstract but about things that have solidity and substance. If you want an example of someone who originally had the ordinary, good Dutch character and feelings and yet has changed those feelings since, yet has reconsidered, and I think will change even more. Then as an example I give you Rappard, who is now already much gentler and more humane than when I first got to know him, and in my view is much improved, even though he was already good before. Although, I fear, not everyone sees it this way, and he has already had some conflict about it. In the past he really was good, but yet he became dissatisfied with that and is now deeper and more humane than he was then. It doesn’t make things easier for him — he used to have far less conflict — I know that for certain — because at the time I jokingly called him ‘the clear conscience’ and teased him about it, which I definitely no longer do, because I see that there has been a revolution in him. He’s a little less elegant and he’s much less superficial as a person, and a certain germ of genius has begun its development, and he has steered clear of the pitfall of ‘withering’. In respect of people who genuinely seek good, I think what Hugo says is true, ‘there is the BLACK ray and there is the WHITE ray’. In my view Pa has more the black ray and Corot has more the white ray, but both of them have a ray from on high. So I don’t call anyone whom we’ve discussed bad, NO, for all that, but I do say that the black ray has a fatal side, and because I’ve since thought about what you said to me on the station platform when you left, I tell you now in explanation of what I couldn’t readily find words for then, ‘I know that Pa is Pa, but there’s something else besides that, namely what we’ll call “the white ray”’. And I find more that’s positive, more true peace in that, and I’ve fixed my attention on it much more. As to Millet, he’s the man above all others who had the white ray. Millet has a gospel, and I ask you whether there’s a distinction between a drawing by him and a good sermon. It makes the sermon black, it’s the outcome of the comparison, even if it (the sermon, that is) is fine in itself, assuming that it is. I know that you too have a lot of strife at the moment, although I don’t know precisely the ins and outs of it. And in any event it’s out of sympathy that I tell you precisely what I think about a few things, because I’ve also had and still have a lot of strife. And I wish you more and more of the white ray, you hear! Thanks for what you sent, and a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Today I’m sending a package of 3 studies which I hope are dry enough. However, if they stick to the sheet of paper I laid on them as a precaution, soak them off with lukewarm water. The smallest one, in particular, has sunk in a lot, go over it with the white of an egg in about a week, or some varnish in a month’s time, to lift them. I’m sending them to let you take a look, and better after this — really. I forgot to reply to what you write about sending the you know what. For the time being would you send a postal order like the last, until I know of an exchange office — deduct expenses, though.  Received a letter from home that Pa had been unwell as a result of a fall — I hope it isn’t more serious than they say. Do you know anything more about it? Went further into the peat fields last week3 — marvellous scenes, the longer I stay here the more beautiful I find it, and from the outset I’ll try to stay here in this region. For it’s so beautiful here that at the same time a great deal of study is needed to capture it, and only solid work can give a truer understanding of things as they are at bottom, and of their serious, sober nature. I came across superb figures — but again, a nature that has so much nobility, so much dignity and gravity must be treated with maturity and patience and prolonged work. This is why, in my view, from the outset I mustn’t regard it as just coming to take a look around here, but it’s in the nature of the thing, if all goes well and we’re granted a little good fortune, that I’ll stay for good. Write again soon, won’t you — I’m longing to hear, for despite all the beauty outside I still feel dejected. Adieu, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My regards to Wisselingh when you see him, and tell him I’m here. Dear brother, Because I have a need to speak frankly, I can’t hide from you that I’m overcome by a feeling of great anxiety, dejection, a je ne sais quoi of discouragement and even despair, too much to express. And that if I can find no consolation for it, it might all too easily overwhelm me unbearably. It really bothers me that I have so little success with people in general, I’m very concerned about this, and all the more so because rising above it and getting on with the work is at stake here. The fate of the woman, moreover, the fate of my sweet, poor little lad and the other child, cut me to the quick. I’d still like to help and I can’t. I’m at a point where I need credit, trust and some warmth, and you see there’s no trust in me. You’re an exception to this, but precisely because everything falls on you it makes it even more apparent how dismal everything is in my case. And if I look at my things, they’re too poor, too inadequate, too much exhausted. We’re having gloomy, rainy days here, and when I come into the corner of the attic where I’ve installed myself it’s all remarkably melancholy there — with the light from one single glass roof tile that falls on an empty painting box, on a bundle of brushes with few decent bristles remaining, well it’s so curiously melancholy that luckily it also has a funny enough side not to weep over it but to regard it more cheerfully. But even so, it’s in a very strange relationship to my plans — in a very strange relationship to the seriousness of the work, and — this is where the laughing stops. What else can I do? — last year ended with an even bigger deficit than I told you, for I’ve already paid off more than I mentioned to you, including Rappard, and still however owe Rappard above all, and that worries me the most because he’s a friend, and although at this moment I’ve paid off everything that was in the slightest bit urgent I’m faced with the problem that I still have to pay for other things before the paint that I would otherwise buy, or rather I don’t dare take it on credit, which would again cause me a considerable bill in time. You know yourself how we weren’t exactly in the mood to be able to say more during your visit, but I tell you now that The Hague has been too much for me, and I had already put off and put off the separation for one particular specific reason, even though the deficit was inevitable if I persisted. 
   This was that, rather than separating, I would have risked one more attempt by marrying her and going to live with her in the country, although not without telling you how things stood. But I believed one thing, that this was the right course, even despite the temporary financial drawbacks, and that not only could it have been her salvation but would also have put an end to great inner struggle for me, which has now, unhappily, doubled for me. And I would rather have seen it through to the bitter end. If either Pa or you had been able to feel it thus, perhaps — I don’t say that I would have been happier or unhappier as a result, and if the roles had been reversed, you in my place, I in yours, I don’t know whether I would have been able to act other than as you did — but perhaps, I say, she would have been saved because of it. I therefore regard it as something where the decision depended not on you two, but on myself (except that I can’t give myself my father’s consent to marry, this single point is beyond me, and in response to a determined question Pa answered me in generalities in which, however, there was no hint of consent), and so I decided, because I already had debts and the future was dark. But this decision is not yet a renewal, and doesn’t take away the exhaustion that a year of too many cares brings in its train, while I’m also left with a wounded heart and a feeling of emptiness and disappointment and melancholy — not so easy to cure. I may be here now, and may almost have covered the financial deficit, and in a while it could be entirely covered, and nature is wonderful here and exceeds my expectations. Yet I’m far from being comfortably settled again and getting on, because the little glimpse of my attic I’m giving you is drawn from life. If I’d known all these things in advance, I would have moved here with the woman last year when she came out of hospital, then there would have been no deficit and then we wouldn’t be separated now, for she’s less guilty of her wrongdoing than her family, who have intrigued very meanly, ostensibly for her but fundamentally against her. Meanwhile, I’ve sometimes wondered, for instance, whether the mother wasn’t also being backed in turn by a priest, because too much has been done on their part to influence the woman for me to explain. All the more so because I’ve still heard nothing from her, although before I left I told her that I would give the carpenter next door2 my address as soon as I knew it myself; I sent it to him and asked him to tell her, and I’ve still heard nothing, except just from this carpenter that she’s collected all her things (more than she brought with her, after all). 
   Now you understand that I’m concerned about her fate, although I believe that if she were simply in need she’d have written, but now there must be something wrong behind it. You will understand my feeling about it, I rather fear that the family is saying to her: he’ll surely write and then... we’ll have him under our thumb — in short they’re presuming on my weakness and I am not going to walk into that trap. And today I’m writing not to her but to the carpenter to tell him that he must make sure she knows my address, but I will not write to her first, and if she writes will see how things actually stand. When I would definitely try to help is if her family were to cast her off entirely, and if it’s the case that her family is helping her, I understand well enough that she’s too much in agreement with them, and has been for a long time, so that I may not or cannot have anything more to do with it. Or, I’ve thought, if there’s a priest behind it, she’s being helped but only on condition that she has nothing more to do with me, and that’s the reason for her silence. But I’ll say that I haven’t yet got so far that I can resign myself to the idea of separation, at present I’m still very, very concerned about her fate, precisely because she’s leaving me in the dark about it. And over and above all this, I’ve been overwhelmed these past few days by sombre feelings about the future, and also about the miserable state of my equipment as far as painting materials are concerned, the impossibility of doing the most essential, most useful things as they really should be done. Since I can already see straightaway that there’s so much beauty here, if I could afford it I would send for my things that are still there in The Hague, and I would either fit up this same attic here as a studio (by letting a bit more light in) or look for another place. And then I’d like to renew and replenish all my equipment. I wish that for once I could do this really thoroughly, and if I could find someone who would trust me that far, my greatest concerns would be allayed. But either everything falls on you or I find no one who trusts me, this is the circle in which my thoughts revolve, and I see no way out. A painter who has no means of his own can’t get by without sometimes rather large credit with people, credit that not only the profession of painter requires, but that the professions of cobbler, carpenter, smith would equally require, I believe no more nor less, if they had to set themselves up or re-establish themselves somewhere. 
   It’s above all in this rainy weather, of which we have months ahead of us, that my hands are really tied. And then, what else can I do? — sometimes my thoughts take on a form — I’ve worked and economized and still not been able to avoid debt, I’ve been faithful to the woman and yet lapsed into disloyalty, I’ve abhorred intrigues and yet I have virtually no credit or possessions. I don’t regard your trust in me lightly, on the contrary, but I rather wonder whether I shouldn’t say to you, forget about me for we won’t get there — it’s too much for one, and there’s no chance of getting any relief from another quarter — is this not proof enough that we should give up? Oh, old chap, I’ve become so melancholy — I’m in magnificent countryside, I have a desire, indeed an absolute need to work — at the same time I’m absolutely at a loss as to how we’re going to get on top of it, when I think that my things are in the most miserable state and I’m here without a studio or anything, and will be embarrassed everywhere until I can improve matters. The models — they refuse to pose if there are bystanders around, and this is the greatest difficulty that makes a studio desirable. I have the same feeling now as I did when I set up the studio in The Hague — ‘if I don’t do it, I’ll certainly not be able to manage’. And even now, given The Hague, I don’t regret that I did as I did in those circumstances, only I wish I had come here 1 1/2  years earlier and set up a studio here instead of there. Pa wrote to me saying that he wanted to help me, but I didn’t let him know anything about my worries, and I hope that you won’t say anything to Pa on this subject either. Pa has his own worries, and would only have even more worries were he to find out that things aren’t going well. So I merely wrote to Pa that everything turned out much better than I expected, which is also perfectly true as far as nature is concerned. As long as the weather was good I wasn’t aware of things because I saw so much that was beautiful, but now that it’s been pouring with rain incessantly for several days I increasingly see how I’m actually stuck here, and I’m embarrassed. What’s to be done? Will things worsen or improve with time? I don’t know, but I feel really miserable and can’t shake it off. In every life some rain must fall And days be dark and dreary4 that is true, it cannot be otherwise, yet I wonder if the number of dark and dreary days can’t sometimes get too great? Nevertheless, I’ve had a model again in the barn, but in very trying light. After all, I don’t refuse to do what can be done, but can I do what MUST be done in the circumstances? And this letter is a sigh for space, and if the winter has to be like these days, I would be in a bad way. It’s beautiful, though, indeed extremely beautiful in the rain, but how does one work, how when one lacks too much? Adieu, old chap, I wish everything would turn out all right, but we need more trust from other people, otherwise I fear it won’t work. I hope to hear from you soon. Did you receive studies? With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, This morning the weather was better again and I went out to paint, regardless. Only it wasn’t possible, I was missing 4 or 5 colours, and so I came back again very wretched. I’m sorry I ventured so far without supplies — I know from prior experience how it can be if one undertakes an excursion like this without knowing that one will also get a response to reasonable, well-founded requests, and that they’ll be listened to. You know yourself a little of how I fared in the Borinage. Well I’m already all too anxious that exactly the same thing could happen to me here, and I must have some security before I venture any further and otherwise, well then I’ll go back (oh — you know, I’m only saying this because I really want to stay). I take no pleasure in it, I saw no good in it then and see even less now in reaching a point of destitution such that one doesn’t even have a roof over one’s head and must tramp on and tramp on like a vagabond into infinity without finding either rest or food or shelter anywhere, moreover without the possibility of doing any work. See for yourself on the map how far it is from Mons to Courrières, I covered that road there on foot from Valenciennes, and back to Mons with less than 2 francs in my pocket — three days and three nights at the beginning of March, in rain and wind, without a roof over my head. These are the precedents, brother, which I haven’t yet come to now, of course — but would come to if I were to venture far without security — if I weren’t to put my affairs in reasonable order — if, I say, I were to venture far into the countryside without backing. Before I start — it’s neither distrust nor suspicion of you but simply a common-sense measure — before I start — I say — (and ask because you wrote to me very recently that you yourself were worried because you feared that there could be trouble and calamities ahead) can you assure me that the usual won’t be lacking? 
   And at the same time — although that’s enough and more wouldn’t be necessary on certain conditions — I’ll tell you the condition on which only the usual is sufficient — to start out well equipped, to set out with a supply of this and that. I, who like to take the initiative for acting myself, because a proof of sincerity, a deed proving that one deals in actions not words, is sometimes needed — I, although I came here this far in Drenthe myself, shrink from taking not the first step but the subsequent steps without being sure of my backing. Experience compels me to ask for a certain unshakeable understanding — if you yourself had experienced what I suffered on that expedition in the Borinage, then in my position now you would have learned exactly the same from this as I did — which I feel now so clearly and plainly — recognizing all the circumstances and things I’m faced with as old acquaintances. The expeditions I have in mind are impossible and madness if I undertake them without supplies. They are highly perilous without a surplus of cash for unforeseen circumstances. 
   In short, one mustn’t undertake them unless one feels through and through that one will always and everywhere be faced with people who stand gaping at someone but don’t lift a finger to help. One must picture oneself being mistrusted in inns &c. — like any poor pedlar (for that’s how they view one) — one often has to pay the money for lodgings — as I had to do even here — in advance in order to get a room by the grace of God. And so EVERYTHING IS PROSE, EVERYTHING IS CALCULATION in regard to the plan for a trip that after all has poetry as its goal. I’ve never before told you as plainly as this, and if I tell you now it is, I ASSURE YOU, not in the least because I mistrust you, but because since I planned the trip I haven’t yet spoken to you as seriously as this about the drawbacks and their relationship to what you might have available or be able to find for it. I must speak of it now because, although in the letter before last I told you that everything here was better than I’d expected — which really does remain the case — I’m still encountering drawbacks in this inn as regards light, space, suitability for trying things out with models — and therefore — although I can if necessary manage and I will do that if necessary — I’m thinking of continuing my journey deeper into the countryside despite the season, not doubting that everywhere (or where I’ll go, at any rate) I’ll find at least as good an opportunity to work as here, and even better space &c. I hope. 
   I’ve now been here for about a fortnight4 and I speak from experience when I tell you that in many, indeed in all respects my tools and equipment and supplies prove to be inadequate. Hoogeveen itself is indeed on the map as a town, where it’s marked with a red dot, but in reality it isn’t (there isn’t even a tower). So I can’t even get any drawing materials. I’ll be even more embarrassed deeper in the countryside and must be prepared for everything or, I repeat, it would be madness. I wouldn’t be making haste with this were the season not so far advanced that it compels me to the greatest urgency. Bear in mind that time is passing, and another fortnight may perhaps have passed before I receive word from you again. Before the winter proper (and winter will be here all too soon!! I really don’t know how I’ll manage) I’d like to be better housed — find quarters somewhere — even further into the heath. And my state of mind, too — which is too gloomy and for which I feel a pressing need to be able to go on working steadily, as being the very best remedy and distraction — means that I must insist on better equipment. And this would actually remain precisely the same should I stay here in this place. I’m bargaining for 2 lots of old paint, which only has some outward damage to the tubes, but, over and above this, brushes, canvas, watercolours and Whatman would also be needed. If I told you that this could be delayed, I would be speaking faint-heartedly, because it’s simply essential that it should happen immediately. If it can’t, then it can’t — but then I can’t go on either. And I wouldn’t have become so melancholy even now if my poor equipment hadn’t tied my hands too much. If, in these various respects, I can find reassurance and that which is indispensable, I believe I’ll be able to get on here. The countryside is very beautiful — today I saw a funeral6 in a barge, which was very curious — six women wrapped in cloaks in the vessel that was being towed by the men along the canal in the heath — the minister — in tricorne and breeches — just like a Meissonier figure7 — followed on the other side — oh, there are all sorts of things. You mustn’t take exception to my writing in this way — I left rather too hastily, and it’s only now that I feel what I lack and that I acted rather rashly — but what else could I do? And I’m so unbearably melancholy when the work doesn’t provide me with a distraction, as you’ll understand, and I must work and work steadily — FORGETTING MYSELF IN THE WORK, otherwise it would overwhelm me. Again, I don’t mistrust you in the very, very least, but my experience forbids me from embarking on an expedition without knowing what I can and what I can’t count on. So speak absolutely frankly, because my decision depends upon it, and I’ll in any event bow to circumstances. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   If I’d known beforehand that it would come to a separation from the woman after all, I would most probably have separated  1/2 a year ago — but, although it still causes me harm even now, I would rather have been faithful to her for too long than for too short a time, and I didn’t want to act solely on my own opinion before I’d spoken to you personally. Don’t forget, when you think about last year, that the reason for the cost wasn’t so much our personal expenditure as the deadly prices in The Hague. Had I known everything — I could have saved 200 guilders on accommodation even if I had taken THIS WHOLE INN here, WITH THE GARDEN THROWN IN — and there you have it, even more than my deficit on one single item. So the woman in particular is as innocent of my deficit as I am myself, in so far as it could be no different in The Hague — but if I had known I would have moved here much sooner. I do blame myself for this neglect — or rather this ignorance. And yet last year is not wasted or not fruitless — it has been a year of hard work and, after all, I look back on it with tranquillity. And as to my not having my hands as free as I’d wish at the moment — they’re not free anyway — even if help comes — for a large part of the autumn will already have passed by then — and only some of those studies that I hoped to have been able to do will have been done before the winter — whatever present difficulties there may be, things will nevertheless come right with patience. Only — I really would like to undertake a trip between now and Christmas.  Let’s make the most of the time, because wasting time is the most expensive thing of all. I have more than 70 painted studies lying in The Hague8 — if only they were of here, they’d have been of more use to me. 
   I must tell you frankly that lately I was sorry, and still am, that I paid my debt out of the money while I was in debt, but none of the people I paid recently was actually dunning me — although they have done in the past — and I could have put it off even longer. I don’t know, may one not take care of oneself first so that one keeps one’s hands and one’s energies free because, I repeat, you see that I won’t be able to get the studies I need painted before the winter, and who will thank me for that? I’ll blame myself and feel wretched about it. Since your visit I’ve paid Leurs more than 30 guilders and now, well, if it was ordinary paint I could get it on credit, but I’m negotiating about old paint that I can get at 33 1/3 % off, but only for cash. It’s the same with Furnée (he’s the father of that surveyor), I have his assurance that he trusted me, but the thing is that I usually paid him cash in the past — and see no reason to change that, since otherwise I would seem to be changing the way I do business and it might affect the friendship, and what I would like to get from him is also part of the lot in question, about half, and again a cash deal. Then brushes, another painting box, and a portfolio for studies, and other things — if I pay cash for them I get better terms and will have no further worries ahead, and if I have no further worries I can start paying Rappard back. My dear Theo, This time I’m writing to you from the very back of beyond in Drenthe, where I arrived after an endless trip through the heath on the barge. I see no way of describing the countryside to you as it should be done, because words fail me. But imagine the banks of the canal as miles and miles of Michels or T. Rousseaus, say, Van Goyens or P. de Koninck. Flat planes or strips differing in colour, which grow narrower and narrower as they approach the horizon. Accentuated here and there by a sod hut or small farm or a few scrawny birches, poplars, oaks. Stacks of peat everywhere, and always barges sailing past with peat or bulrushes from the marshes. Here and there thin cows of a delicate colour, often sheep — pigs. The figures that now and then appear on the plain usually have great character, sometimes they’re really charming. I drew, among others, a woman in the barge with crepe around her cap brooches because she was in mourning, and later a mother with a small child — this one had a purple scarf around her head. There are a lot of Ostade types5 among them, physiognomies that remind one of pigs or crows, but every so often there’s a little figure that’s like a lily among the thorns. In short, I’m very pleased about this trip, for I’m full of what I’ve seen. The heath was extraordinarily beautiful this evening. There’s a Daubigny in one of the Albums Boetzel that expresses that effect precisely. The sky was an inexpressibly delicate lilac white — not fleecy clouds, because they were more joined together and covered the whole sky, but tufts in tints more or less of lilac — grey — white — a single small rent through which the blue gleamed. Then on the horizon a sparkling red streak — beneath it the surprisingly dark expanse of brown heath, and a multitude of low roofs of small huts standing out against the glowing red streak. 
   In the evening this heath often has effects that the English would describe as weird and quaint. The spiky silhouettes of Don Quixote-like mills9 or strange hulks of drawbridges are profiled against the teeming evening sky. In the evening a village like that is sometimes really snug, with the light from the little windows reflected in the water or in mud and puddles. Before I left Hoogeveen I painted a few more studies there, among them a large farmhouse with a mossy roof. For I’d had paint sent from Furnée’s, because I thought the same about it as you say in your letter, that by making sure I become absorbed in the work and lose myself in it so to speak, my mood would change, and indeed it’s already a good deal better. But at times — like those moments when you think about going to America11 - I think about going to the East as a volunteer. But they’re those wretched, sombre moments when things overwhelm one, and I would wish that you might see the silent heath that I see through the window here, because such a thing soothes one and inspires more faith, resignation, calm work. I drew several studies in the barge, but I’m staying here to paint. I’m close to Zweeloo here, where Liebermann, among others, has been, and besides there’s an area here where there are large, very old sod huts where there isn’t even a partition between the barn and the living room. My plan for these first days is to visit that region. But what tranquillity, what breadth, what calm there is in nature here, one doesn’t feel it until one has miles and miles of Michels between oneself and the everyday. 
   I can’t give you a definite address at the moment15 because I don’t know exactly where I’ll be for the next few days, but I’ll be in HOOGEVEEN on 12 October, and if you send your letter at the usual time to the same address I’ll find it there in Hoogeveen on the twelfth. The place where I am now is Nieuw-Amsterdam. I received a postal order for 10 guilders from Pa, which with what I got from you means that I can now do some painting. I’m thinking of returning to this inn where I am now for a long stay if I can reach the area with the large old sod huts easily from here, since I would have better light and space here. For as to that painting by that Englishman with the thin cat and the little coffin, although the idea first came to him in that dark room, he would have found it very difficult to paint in that same place, at least one usually works too light if one sits in a room that’s too dark, so that when one brings it into the light one sees that all the shadows are too weak. I experienced this only recently, when I painted an open door and the view through into the little garden from inside the barn. Well, I just wanted to tell you that I’ll also be able to overcome this drawback, because I could get a room here with good light and where a stove can stand in the winter. Now, old chap, if you think no more about America, and I no more about Harderwijk, then I hope things will work themselves out. I admit that your explanation of C.M.’s silence might be the case, but sometimes nonchalance can also be deliberate. You’ll find a few croquis on the back. I write in haste, or rather it’s already late. How I wish that we could walk together here and — paint together. I believe that the countryside would win you over and convince you. Adieu, I hope that you’re well and will have a bit of good fortune. I thought about you again and again on this trip. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
    Here’s a little scratch from the peat fields. There are often curious oppositions of Black and White here. For example, a canal with white sandy banks through a sooty black plain. You can see it above, too, small black figures against a white sky, and again gradations of black and white in the sand in the foreground. I saw an effect exactly like Ruisdael’s Bleaching fields at Overveen:3 foreground a high road shadowed by clouds, then a low, bare meadow on which the light fell, with two houses in the distance (one with a slate-grey, one with a red roof). Behind them a canal and stacks of peat, changing in size depending on the plane in which they stood — far away a small silhouette of a little row of huts and a small church tower. Small black figures laying the washing out to bleach, a single mast of a barge standing up between the peat stacks. Above, a grey sky with a lot of movement in it. 
   Well, I often think about Van Goyen on these misty mornings, the little houses are just like his. That really peaceful and naive look. I believe I’ve found my country, you know. Coming events cast their shadows before, says an English proverb. I just wanted to write and say that you do know, don’t you, that you must never think in melancholy hours that you’re without a friend? For I believe I can give you the assurance that you can trust me. Why am I saying this? — because I’ve since been thinking over what you wrote about America. And even so, I don’t think it’s a good plan, even if you do have the best relations there, that’s to say with Knoedler5 or anyone else.  Even if it’s only in melancholy moments that your thoughts turn to it, even if it isn’t a plan — I don’t believe it is — it’s still proof that you have your gloomy moments. Which I find remarkably understandable — even though I don’t know the circumstances, other than very generally, that it isn’t very pleasant in the firm. Wisselingh told me the story of the house in London, and all I say about it is that there’s most certainly a huge difference between the house of G&Cie in the old days (for instance, when Uncle Vincent was still there, and not even in his latter years) and now. I mean, in my view, in those days it was more a matter of personal energy and resoluteness. Now there are nullities (I don’t say mediocrities, not even in a bad sense, because that’s still much too good) like friend Bock, who, mark you, represent the house in London, and do so now that it’s organized on an infinitely lavish scale. Moreover, these aren’t isolated phenomena. Now this must be very discouraging for people like you, everything much more discouraging than in earlier years. Personal passion for work, personal energy. Tersteeg has it, you have it, and at the same time despite that you have a position. But in the case of change, be aware that it could be that you get nothing out of it, 
   and may everywhere come up against the ‘triumph of mediocrity, of nullity, of absurdity’. Take Wisselingh, who had a strong character, very well, he keeps going even though he has nothing like the active life that Uncle Vincent had. Why not? — because it now comes down to different things and, if he was young now, say, Uncle Vincent would no longer be able to do now what he could do then, and you would be able to do now if now was then. So I say, what attraction does it hold nowadays, are people not bored? — as for my part I believe Wisselingh, for one, is hugely bored because he cannot act. Furthermore, if you have personal energy, don’t wear it out, don’t let it get rusty, if things get miserable and one can’t count on anything, look for something simpler. However, I’m so out of things, I really have such a complete lack of direct knowledge of it — I think the few words about London that I heard from Wisselingh are all that I’ve heard about the business in 1 1/2  years — that I may have got it all entirely wrong. Yet some things seem so extraordinary to me that I imagine the business in general as being out of joint, although I don’t know where or how things are disjointed the worst. Now you’ll say, yes, but the painter’s affairs are much worse, less secure, and there too it could be that personal energy or personal passion for work couldn’t do everything, for example not provide food for someone at first. Very well, all granted, but suppose it was a question of the simplest needs, the business is no more critical for it, although it remains critical when, instead of the expensive city life, one seeks a place where it’s cheaper. Assuming I might have a bit of good fortune and we might succeed in finding a few friends for my work — then, yes, then I would be talking very differently. 
   Precisely because I have you to thank that I’ve been able to carry on thus far, I wanted to say to you that I don’t doubt for a moment that you would regard it as something wonderful if you had work for your hands, and even if initially it were to bring about the most impossible and conflicting relationships in your actual position in regard to life in general, nevertheless you would have a sense of ‘what does it matter to me’ to counter this, because of that view of the future. A future which, although it doesn’t depend entirely on making personal effort, would be more directly connected with it than things which aren’t manual work. When you started you wouldn’t have to be alone, and that, I assure you, enormously shortens the time when nothing works. It’s really terrible that one sometimes has to search for a year for something that could be explained in a fortnight by someone who is further along. It comes down to personal effort, but the road is easier or harder depending on whether one is alone or not. And the worst thing is this absolutely having to know this or that, and if one asks for something the other turns his back on you. This is something beastly, but then that’s how it goes, and perhaps it goes with the manners. You’re then beaten, and it’s painful to know in advance that one will certainly go through a lot of mistakes before one finds out for oneself, which cause a waste of time and misery that could have been avoided. One ends up not really asking anyone any more, and relying solely on oneself, but this ought to be organized rather differently. But then, there are so many things that ‘ought to be’. Enough, I simply say if you ever change (even though there isn’t the least question of it now), then become a painter. And then start by spending the initial period with me, even though I myself don’t know as much as some other people, and although I myself still come up against many things. And I’ll speak much, much more confidently about this if I can get a little more certainty in my affairs this year. If C.M. comes, talk to him about things again. I wish above all that things would become a little easier for you through your relationship with him. Something that would also be very helpful to you is that you, in any event, come fresh from the art world, which I had already left long before when I started. For it’s necessary to feel clearly the rapports between nature and painted things in general. I’ve had to renew that in myself. I hope to make something of the women on the heath in the scratch overleaf, and shall go back to the same field. Adieu, old chap, but all the same you mustn’t think about America, in my opinion. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. And never think ‘I’m not an artist’, because in so far as general gifts of energy and understanding are required, be assured that you have them. As I said, I’m going to Hoogeveen on 12 October, but then I’m coming back here. Dear brother, I just received your letter. I read and re-read it with interest, and something that I’ve already thought about sometimes, without knowing what to do about it, is becoming clear to me. It’s that you and I have in common a time of quietly drawing impossible windmills &c., where the drawings are in a singular rapport with the storm of thoughts and aspirations — in vain, because no one who can shed light is concerned about them (only a painter would then be able to help one along the right path, and their thoughts are elsewhere). This is a great inner struggle, and it ends in discouragement or in throwing those thoughts overboard as impractical, and precisely when one is 20 or so, one is passionate to do that. Whatever the truth of the matter that I said something then that unwittingly contributed to throwing those things overboard; at that moment my thoughts were perhaps the same as yours, that’s to say that I saw it as something impossible, but as regards that desperate struggle without seeing any light, I know it too, how awful it is. With all one’s energy one can do nothing and thinks oneself mad, and I don’t know what else. When I was in London, how often I would stand on the Thames Embankment and draw as I made my way home from Southampton Street in the evening, and it looked terrible. If only there had been someone then who had told me what perspective was, how much misery I would have been spared, how much further along I would be now. Well, fait accompli is fait accompli. It didn’t happen then — I did talk to Thijs Maris3 occasionally (I didn’t dare speak to Boughton, because I felt such great respect in his presence) but I didn’t find it there either, that helping me with the first things, with the ABC. Let me now repeat that I believe in you as an artist, and that you can still become one, indeed that you should very soon think calmly about whether you are one or not, whether you would be able to produce something or not if you learned to spell the aforementioned ABC, and then also spent some time walking through the wheatfield and the heath, in order to renew once more what you yourself say, ‘I used to be part of that nature, now I don’t feel that any more’. Let me tell you, brother, that I myself have felt so deeply, deeply that which you say there. That I’ve had a time of nervous, barren stress when I had days when I couldn’t find the most beautiful countryside beautiful, precisely because I didn’t feel myself part of it. That’s what pavements and the office — and care — and nerves — do. Don’t take it amiss if I say now that your soul is sick at this moment — it really is — it isn’t good that you aren’t part of nature — and I think that No. 1 now is for you to make that normal again. I think it’s very good that you yourself feel the difference between your 
   state of mind now and in other years. And don’t doubt that you will agree with me that you must work on it to put it right. I now have to look back into my own past to see what the matter was, spending years in that stony, barren state of mind and trying to emerge from it, and yet it got worse and worse instead of better.  Not only did I feel indifferent instead of responsive to nature but also, which was much worse, I felt exactly the same about people.  People said that I was going mad; I myself felt that I wasn’t, if only because I felt my own malady very deep inside myself and tried to get over it again. I made all sorts of forlorn attempts that led to nothing, so be it, but because of that idée fixe of getting back to a normal position I never confused my own desperate doings, scrambling and squirmings with I myself. At least I always felt ‘let me just do something, be somewhere, it must get better, I’ll get over it, let me have the patience to recover’. I don’t believe that someone like Boks, for instance, who really turned out to be mad, thought like that4 — so I say again, I’ve thought about it a lot since, about my years of all sorts of scrambling, and I don’t see that, given my circumstances, I could be other than I have been. Here is the ground that sank beneath my feet — here is the ground which, if it sinks, must make a person miserable, whoever he may be. I was with G&Cie for 6 years — I had put down roots in G&Cie and I thought that, although I left, I could look back on 6 years of good work, and that if I presented myself somewhere I could refer to my past with equanimity. But by no means; things are done so hurriedly that little consideration is given, little is questioned or reasoned. People act on the most random, most superficial impressions. And once one is out of G&Cie no one knows who G&Cie is. It’s a name like X&Co., without meaning — and so one is simply ‘a person without a situation’. All at once — suddenly — fatally — everywhere — there you have it. Of course, precisely because one has a certain respectability one doesn’t say I’m so-and-so, I’m this or that. One presents oneself for a new situation serious in all respects, without saying much, with a view to putting one’s hand to the plough. Very well, but then, that ‘person without a situation’, the man from anywhere, gradually becomes suspect. 
   Suppose that your new employer is a man whose affairs are very mysterious, and suppose that he has just one goal, ‘money’. With all your energy, can you really immediately, at once, help him a very great deal in that? Perhaps not, eh? And yet he wants money, money come what may; you want to know something more about the business, and what you see or hear is pretty disgusting. And soon it’s: ‘someone without a situation’, I don’t need you any more. See, now that’s what you increasingly become: someone without a situation. Go to England, go to America, it doesn’t help at all, you’re an uprooted tree everywhere. G&Cie, where your roots are from an early age6 — G&Cie, although indirectly they cause you this misery because in your youth you regarded them as the finest, the best, the biggest in the world — G&Cie, were you to return to them — I didn’t do that then — I couldn’t — my heart was too full, much too full — G&Cie, they’d give you the cold shoulder, say it was no longer their concern or something. With all this one has been uprooted, and the world turns it around and says that you’ve uprooted yourself. Fact — your place no longer acknowledges you. I felt too melancholy to do anything about it — and I don’t remember ever having been in the mood to talk to someone about it as I’m talking to you now. Because, and actually to my surprise, for I thought that even if they did it to me they would, however, certainly not have dared to do it to you, I read in your letter the words ‘when I spoke to them this week the gentlemen made it almost impossible for me’. Old chap, you know how it is with me, but if you’re miserable about one thing and another, do not feel you are alone. It’s too much to bear alone, and to some extent I can sympathize with you the way it is. Now, stand your ground and don’t let your pain throw you off balance — if the gentlemen behave like this, stand on your dignity and don’t accept your dismissal except on terms that guarantee you’ll get a new situation. They aren’t worth your losing your temper, don’t do that, even if they provoke you. I lost my temper and walked straight out. Now in my position it was different again from yours; I was one of the least, you are one of the first, but what I say about being uprooted, I’m afraid that you would feel the same if you were out of it, so 
   look at that, too, cold-bloodedly, stand up to them and don’t let them push you out without being a little prepared for that difficult situation of beginning again. And know this — given an uprooting, given not making headway again, don’t despair. Then, in the worst case, do NOT go to America, because it’s exactly the same there as in Paris. No, beware of reaching that point where one says: I’ll make myself scarce; I had that myself, I hope that you won’t have it. If you had it, I say again, beware of it, resist it with great coolness, say to yourself, this point proves to me that I’m running into a brick wall. This is a wall for bulls to run into; I am a bull too, but an intelligent one, I am a bull about becoming an artist. Anyway, get out before you smash your head to pieces, that’s all. I’m not saying that that’s what will happen; I hope that there will be no question whatever of running into a wall. But suppose after all that there was a whirlpool with accompanying sharp-edged rocky promontories, well, I would just think that you might avoid it, wouldn’t you? Perhaps you’ll admit that those rocks might be there, since you yourself pulled me out of that whirlpool when I had no more hope of getting out of it and was powerless to fight against it any more. I mean, give those waters a very wide berth. They’re beginning to drag you down in that one thing — I say no more nor less than I’m sure of — that you aren’t part of nature. Do you think it strange of me that I dare to say as much as this: now, at the very beginning, change course now and no later than now in so far as you work at restoring the bond between yourself and nature? The more you remain in the frame of mind of not being part of nature, the more you play into the hands of your eternal enemy (and mine too), Nerves. I have more experience than you of the sort of tricks they could play on you. You’re now beginning to enter waters that are throwing you off balance, inasmuch as the rapport with nature seems to be broken. Take that very coolly as a sign of aberration; say, oh no, not that way if you please. Seek a new passion, an interest in something; think, for example, after all perspective must fundamentally be the simplest of all things and chiaroscuro a simple, not a complicated matter. It must be something that speaks for itself, otherwise I don’t much care for it. Try to get back to nature in this way. 
   Will you now, old chap, simply take it from me when I say that as I write to you I’ve got something back of what I had years ago. That I’m again taking pleasure in windmills, for example, that particularly here in Drenthe I feel much as I did then, at the time when I first began to see the beauty in art. You’d be prepared to call that a normal mood, wouldn’t you? — finding the outdoor things beautiful, being calm enough to draw them, to paint them. And suppose you were to come up against a brick wall somewhere, wouldn’t you find someone in my present mood composed enough to want to take a little walk with him, precisely in order to have a distraction from thoughts if, through nervousness, these thoughts start to acquire a certain despairing element? You are yourself and not fundamentally changed, but your nerves are beginning to be unstrung by strain. Now, look after your nerves, and don’t take them lightly, because they cause quick-tempered manoeuvres — well, you know a thing or two about that yourself. Make no mistake, Theo, at this moment Pa, Ma, Wil, Marie, and I above all, are supported by you; it seems to you that you have to go on for our sakes, and believe me I fully understand that, or at least can understand it to a very great extent. Just think about this for a moment. What is your goal and Pa’s, Ma’s, Wil’s, Marie’s and mine? What do we all want? We want, acting decently, to keep our heads above water, we all want to arrive at a clear position, not a false position, don’t we? This is what we all want, unanimously and sincerely, however much we differ or don’t differ among ourselves. What are we all prepared to do against fate? All, all of us without exception to work quietly, calmness. Am I wrong in regarding the general situation in this way? Very well, what are we facing now? We’re confronting a calamity which, touching you, touches us all. Fine. A storm is brewing. We see it brewing. That lightning might well strike us. Fine. What do we do now? Do we reach our wit’s end? I don’t think that we’re inclined that way — even if certain nerves that we all have in our bodies, even if certain fibres of the heart, finer than nerves, are shocked or experience pain. We are today what we were yesterday, even if the lightning strikes or even, perhaps, should it thunder. 
   Are we or are we not the sort who can look at things calmly? That, simply, is the question, and I see no reason why we should not be so. What I also see is the following — that our position towards one another is also straight at this moment. That for the purposes of keeping straight it’s desirable to have a closer connection, and in my view there are a few things in ourselves that we’ll have to work out between us. In the first place, I would be very pleased if your relationship with Marie were to be put on a firmer footing; in other words a formal engagement if possible. Secondly, I would consider it desirable that we all understood that circumstances urgently require that Brabant no longer be closed to me. I myself think it better that I do not go there unless there’s no other choice, but in the event of an emergency the rent that I’m obliged to pay could be saved, because Pa has a house there rent-free. I’m at a point where there will probably be some income from my work soon. And if we could now reduce expenditure to a minimum, even below what it is at present, perhaps I could earn instead of consume, become positive instead of negative. If it’s a question of our having to earn, I can see a chance in this way — if there’s patience at home, a realization of the necessities, if above all, when it comes to models for me, even the family cooperates. As to the question of models, they’d definitely have to do what I wanted, have to trust that I had my reasons for it. If I were to say to Ma or to Wil or Lies, pose for me, it would have to happen.
   I wouldn’t make any unreasonable demands, of course. You know how it came about that I left; the fundamental cause was misunderstanding one another, actually in all things. So can we live together? Yes, for a time, if we have to and people on both sides understand that everything has to be subordinated to what the force majeure of circumstances dictates. I had hoped that that was understood at the time, and I didn’t take the initiative to leave — when I was told to go away, though, I went. Anyway, I broach this because I see that perhaps things will come to pass such that you must have your hands free, and if it might help for me to live at home for a while, I think that Pa and I would both have to reconcile ourselves to that immediately. Although if it isn’t necessary — so much the better. But I’m not saying that I absolutely must be in Drenthe; where isn’t the most important thing. So be aware of this, that in that respect I would of course do whatever you thought advisable. Well, I’ll write to Pa today, without more ado, simply this: if Theo were to think it advisable that my expenses should be reduced to a minimum and I should live at home for a while, I hope that both you and I will have the sense not to put a spoke in the wheel through mutual discord, but keeping silent about everything that has passed will reconcile ourselves to what circumstances bring. Nothing more about you or about business nor, should I have to live at home, would I talk about you other than in general terms. And for the time being I would certainly not mention Marie. Theo, if you had said perhaps a year ago that you would certainly not become a painter, would certainly stay in your present profession, I would have had to accede; now I don’t accede so readily, I still see that repeated occurrence in the history of art of the phenomenon of two brothers who are painters. I know that the future is unpredictable, at least I tell you that I don’t know how things will turn out. However, it’s definitely the case that I believe in you as an artist, and this is actually reinforced by some of the things in your last letter. Mind now, I advise you of one thing that’s urgently necessary — beware of your nerves — use all means to keep your constitution calm. Consult a doctor daily if you possibly can, not so much because a doctor can do anything about it, as much as would be needed, but because the very fact of going to a 
   doctor to talk about it &c. will show you, this is nerves, that is me. It’s a question here of self-knowledge, of serenity, despite all the tricks that the nerves must play. I consider the whole idea that it could come to your making yourself scarce to be the effect of nerves. You would do wisely and well to regard it in this way yourself. I hope that you will not bring off a coup, I hope that you will not make a financial invention — I hope that you will become a painter. If, through cool aplomb, you can let the crisis now deliberately being created by the gentlemen10 run off you like water off a duck’s back, can say to them ‘I am certainly not leaving in this way, certainly not now, never like this’ — if you say to them, I have plans but they aren’t even of a commercial nature, and as soon as they can be put into effect I’ll retire in all tranquillity; until that time, as long as you can’t find fault with what I do, leave things as they are, but know that you’re very much mistaken in me if you think that I would leave because you make things impossible for me, or would part from you in any unreasonable way. If you want to be rid of me, very well, I also want to be rid of you, but amicably and in good order, and it goes without saying that I must keep going. Anyhow, try to make them understand that you’re dead cool and calm and will remain so, however that you have absolutely no desire whatsoever to stay — but that you won’t leave until you see a favourable moment. This seems to me to be the way to counter what they’re now trying to do, to make it impossible for you to stay. Perhaps they suspect that you’ve already established relations elsewhere, and in such a case making it impossible for someone to stay can sometimes be very nasty. If they turn nasty now, there’s nothing for it, cut it short — perhaps the best thing might be to explain calmly that you would retire on certain conditions. In the meantime, let me know if I should go home for a while so that you have your hands free. And again, Pa, Ma, Wil, Marie, I, in a word all of us, think much more of you yourself than of your money. Making yourself scarce is nothing but sheer nerves. But — restore — try to restore, even if it doesn’t happen all at once — the rapport between you and nature and people. And if the only way to do this is to become a painter, well then become one, even if you see ever so many objections and impossibilities. Now listen — write to me very soon — be sure to do that. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. I’m sending you the enclosed scratches to give you some idea of so many diverse things that the seemingly monotonous countryside has to offer. You see, I just take what’s there, I grab this and that by the neck; it will arrange itself and ripen of its own accord later. But I don’t want to begin here with a preconceived plan; on the contrary, I want my plan to ripen out of my studies. I don’t know the real character of the countryside as yet — now I’m doing everything I come across, and then later, when I have some experience, I want to try to convey it in what is fundamentally its most characteristic aspect. The one so much part of the other that one has to seize everything; however much one would like to concentrate, one may miss nothing. There’s plenty of work, in other words. I now have a reasonably large room where a stove has been placed, where there happens to be a small balcony. From which I can even see the heath with the huts. I also look out on a very curious drawbridge. Well, downstairs is an inn and a peasant kitchen with an open peat fire, very cosy in the evenings. One can think best by one of those peasant hearths with a cradle beside it. If I feel melancholy or can’t work something out, I just go downstairs. I can tell you that I’ve heard something indirectly about the woman. After all, I couldn’t for the life of me understand why she hadn’t even written to me. Well then, I wrote to the carpenter next door to us4 asking whether the woman hadn’t been to him for the address. Well then, the blackguard writes back to me: Oh yes sir, but I thought that you certainly wouldn’t want her to know your address, so I just made out that I didn’t know it. Bastards. Then I wrote to her directly, although this wasn’t as good as my agreement, which was expressly made with him and with her, but I do not want now or ever to conceal or to have to conceal myself, and I’d rather write to her at her family’s address than have even the semblance of hiding. That’s what I think about it. And I sent her some money too — if this may have wretched consequences, I’m not responsible for them, I will not play false. I found the letter from that scoundrel in Hoogeveen on my last trip there. Friend Rappard also wrote to me again from Terschelling and — now today — from Utrecht — he’s back again! Has brought studies with him, mostly of the old folks’ home. I don’t quite understand this. He told me that the doctor had advised sea air for him during the winter for his health, that moreover he had such a desire to spend a winter in the country, but it seems to have turned out differently. Anyway. 
   You wrote to me about Liebermann: his coloration consists of slate-grey tones with transitions chiefly to brown, to yellow-grey. I’ve never seen anything by him, but now that I see nature here I understand perfectly how reasonable it is that he arrives at it. As to colour, things often remind me of Michel too. You know, he also has a grey sky (slate-grey sometimes), a brown earth with yellow-greys. It’s completely true and faithful to nature. There are Jules Dupré effects — yes, there are certainly those, but in autumn like this, it’s exactly that — as you wrote about Liebermann. And if I find that which I seek — and why shouldn’t I find it? — I’ll certainly often do it thus, in that same spectrum. That’s to say, in order to see it like this one mustn’t look at the local colour in itself, but consider that local colour in relation to the tone of the sky. That sky is grey — however so luminous that even our pure white might perhaps not capture it in terms of light and brilliance. But if one starts by painting the sky grey, thus remaining far below the intensity of nature, then all the more, in order to remain consistent, will one have to set the browns and yellow-greys of the earth several tones lower. It seems to me that this is something which, once one analyzes it like this, is so self-evident that one finds it hard to understand that one hasn’t always seen it thus. But it’s the local colour of a green field or a reddish-brown heath which, viewed in isolation, can easily confuse someone. 
   Write to me again soon because, as letters go, your last missive was remarkably brief — all too brief, but was also evidently written in the office. How’s the Triennial Exhibition going? There’ll be a lot of beautiful things. I’m really interested to hear something about it, because these too are certainly the characteristic things of the moment, not of much earlier years. So if you have a moment, do write something about it. According to a current rumour, it appears that Liebermann is somewhere here in the neighbourhood. I’d like to meet him sometime.  Well, I’m very pleased that I’ve found a more suitable studio, precisely because it’s rather rainy and the bad weather can be expected any time, so as not to have to sit idle at home. I wish you could just see the countryside; it’s so inexpressibly beautiful in the evening. And it seems to me the snow will be gripping too. I read a very good book by Carlyle, Heroes and hero-worship, full of nice things, like for instance, We have the duty to be brave, although this is usually wrongly regarded as something exceptional. It’s also true in life that the good is such a high light that it goes without saying that we can’t reach that. If we set our spectrum lower and nonetheless try to remain bright and not lapse into lifelessness, this is the most reasonable thing to do, and makes life less impossible. 
   There are amazing characters here — nonconformist ministers with pig faces and cocked hats. Also many veritable Jews who look extraordinarily ugly amidst Milletesque types or on this unsophisticated, sad heath. On the other hand, they are genuine. I travelled with a party of Jews who were having theological discussions with a couple of peasants. How are such absurdities possible, one would say, in countryside like this? Why can’t they look out of the window or smoke pipes or something, and at any rate behave as reasonably as their pigs, say, which aren’t a nuisance at all, even though they’re pigs, and remain in harmony with their surroundings and are in place there? But before the ministers like the ones I saw here achieve the height of civilization and reason of common pigs, they have to improve a good deal more, and it will take centuries before they’re in that position. At the moment, any pig at all is much better, to my mind. Well, I’m going out again, do write if you get a moment, and look particularly to see whether Liebermann has anything in the exhibition. Regards — so my address just remains here for the time being11 — wishing you the best, with a handshake Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Now I’ve already written about it once, I’ve thought about it again since then, out on the heath. The same thing I’ve already thought about many times. Both among the old and among the modern painters there’s the constantly recurring phenomenon of two brothers who are painters, whose work diverges less than it runs parallel. They’re very different, yet complement each other perfectly. Take the Ostades, Adriaan and Isaac. Anyway, you know very well, of course: a multitude of cases. The Van Eycks as well. And Jules and Emile Breton in the present day, to mention just a few. And I’ve already thought so very often that it must be so almighty pleasant to work together, and both could be so productive for the very reason that one supports the other and many melancholy times disappear. I can’t repeat to you enough, old chap — one is just beginning in one’s thirtieth year. Look at the history of those people; even many of them who painted from an early age only change then, only become themselves then. I just want you to consider these things. Now I know that one is faced with the question — bread. I don’t think it wrong, but quite right to reason: I have to eat, live somewhere. All right, fine, but there’s one thing I ask everyone who says, I don’t have the means — that question is: My friend, what are your demands, how high do you set your standard? Is your character such that you think the same about it as Corot, say, who wasn’t embarrassed, if he could dine out, to buy a loaf from the baker and eat it in the fields? In short, managing to make do and not clinging in the least to life’s routine. This is precisely what you are au fond, and you would adapt perfectly to a host of things. And even if the question of ‘bread’ hasn’t been resolved, it has been largely cleared up.
   When I think now about the possibility or impossibility of your coming here, now or later, and start working it out, then I come to the conclusion that together we’d need little more or no more than I alone. And besides, for myself I firmly believe that I would receive stimulation from you in so many things, would find support by talking and discussing things with you, friction of ideas &c., that I would be able to work better. Now not a day passes, so to speak, but that I make one thing or another. I can’t help but make progress precisely through learning by doing; every drawing one makes, every study one paints is a step. It’s true that it’s like going along a road, one can see the steeple in the distance, but the land undulates, so that when one thinks one is there, there’s another stretch that one didn’t see at first and which is added on. However, one does get nearer. In a while, longer or shorter, I don’t know how long, I’ll reach a point where I start selling. Very well, once I’ve reached that point, it won’t be by halves for I don’t do things by halves. And I’m doing different things at the same time; I’ll have more than one string to my bow, and hence more than one arrow too. So you see what I for my part can throw into the ‘bread’ gulf. Things can change for me, and if I’m still not selling now, with all my hard graft — I repeat, that can change. We’d have to have, let’s say, 150 francs a month as a minimum, preferably 200.  Credit would have to be found for that, not without a security, but that security would be our work. Let’s say that we’d have to work for another 2 years before we start to earn quickly, and more than the outgoings, so that we can pay off the debt.
   200 francs a month over 2 years is 24 x 200 francs = 2, francs. Let’s call it 1, guilders. The guarantee of this — I’m talking now about you and me working together — is that we’ll already have thrown a lot into it ourselves and have laid a certain foundation. What I can do, I can do, some aspects of drawing, yes and even some aspects of painting are firmly ingrained in me, and not in the least coincidentally but acquired through honest work. I say, yet another guarantee that we aren’t just talking hot air. Listen Theo, I wouldn’t be able to talk to you if you didn’t have a certain self-confidence, a certain self-knowledge. I may already have told you before that, au fond, you’re an artist, as time goes by that feeling gets stronger and stronger in me. You’ll say ‘I can’t make anything’ — well of course you can’t now, but just work for a year, wait till the initial things have become a little clearer, and you’ll feel with the greatest serenity that, yes, perhaps not everyone can become a painter through his own hard graft if he doesn’t have a certain turn of mind, but for yourself you would discover that you really do have that turn of mind of reflection, of thinking and analyzing, of feeling the beauty in nature, and that you therefore can be an artist, because you have a desire to work and energy, although they’re now going in another direction, so that nothing can be left for art. But were that same desire to work to be the driving force behind your feeling for beauty, the result would be a true painter. I’ll just return briefly to the ‘bread’ question. A lot of things that people say can’t be done actually can.
   Let me just suppose for a moment that you were at a point where you had to change — (you aren’t at that point yet, I’m just supposing it for a moment). Then you could get a position in another firm. Very well, but your more distant future, not the foreground but the background, the horizon, is that bright? It seems to me to be very much in darkness. Take, similarly, the more distant future if you become a painter; the darkness isn’t there but it’s close by, right in the foreground. Your own diligence can make you a painter, and other people won’t be able to stop you, but in the art business your own diligence may well not be the article that certain bosses, even new ones, might require, particularly at times when they themselves have got the wind up. With all your own diligence you could end up like Wisselingh, who’s also very diligent and was with G&Cie.  I said many things that people say can’t be done actually can be when you come down to it. Why shouldn’t we be able to live with Pa if circumstances meant that we had to? I don’t say for nothing, but in the event that we couldn’t get as much credit as we’d need to last out here in Drenthe. But never mind that and concentrate on the former. We’d have a hard struggle, but the pleasure of being together, living together in this inexpressibly beautiful nature, above all the consciousness of being two craftsmen, old chap, how almighty pleasant it would be. So almighty pleasant that I scarcely dare think of it and yet can’t help myself, although that happiness seems too tremendous to me, for you as well as for me myself, since we aren’t accustomed to having pleasure in our lives, and feel as if that were more for other people — not for us. 
    We’d have to have 1, guilders credit. I don’t know where and how it would be possible to come by it. I’ll work out for you what it would buy. We’d make an arrangement for 2 years with the man here, if necessary pay a sum in advance, I think that he’d do it for 1, guilders, give us both food for those two years, let us this room I’m living in now; in short, we’d be free of all domestic cares for 2 years and could work in peace and quiet. Two years is a long time, is all you’ll need in the circumstances to reach a certain level. We’d then have enough left over to lay in a big batch of paint, to set ourselves up properly. Few things could then upset us or divert us from our plan, or anything else. Then we must and then we can.  We’ll have assured our lives as far as food and shelter are concerned, and can no longer go back but must, must, must go forward and win. As for you, I would think that you must do other than I did. Mine is in the past, I did what I did up to today, but I wish above all that you would start painting straightaway; I do know what you’d want to make here. I would like you to get down straightaway to landscapes conceived in the spirit of Michel, which I see over and over again, wholly and utterly Michel, that is absolutely what it is here. I’m pretty sure I would be able to help you on the way. Time will tell what you want later but, as I say, I believe I’d be able to help you on the way because I’ve been tackling things in that genre myself in the last few days; I don’t pretend that they’re Michels, but I do dare say that once you’ve gone that far you’ll find your own way from there. 
   For my part, particularly if you were here, I would concentrate more and more on the figure. I’ll just scribble down for you the landscapes I have on the easel.  You see here the genre of studies that I’d like you to tackle straightaway. To learn to take a broad view of the landscape in its simple lines and contrast of light and shade. I saw the top one today, was wholly and utterly Michel. That earth was superb in reality. I don’t think my study is mature enough yet, but the effect made an impression on me, and as far as light and shade are concerned it was as I draw it here for you.
   The bottom one, with a little delicate green wheatfield in the foreground and withered grasses behind the cottage and stacks of peat, is another glimpse of the heath, and the sky very light. You see, what I’m getting at is that you ought to start in that genre, and would do well from the outset, it seems to me, definitely not to draw exclusively. I mean everything I write to you here in absolute, absolute earnest, I’ve already thought about it for so long.  And wouldn’t have spoken about it if everything had remained well at G&Cie, but now, in the circumstances, it’s only because of my own wretched finances that I don’t say even more decidedly, come here straightaway. Otherwise I wouldn’t say anything more than that. The country is superb, superb, everything calls out to you: paint! So distinctive and so varied. Look, old chap, however things go, aren’t there always financial difficulties everywhere, and where are they less than here, and where or how on earth can a time of struggle lead to a more permanent peace? To a great peace that no one can disturb. For myself, I can say no more than that I’m willing to pledge all my own studies as security for the repayment of what we absolutely need for the first two years. What’s more, we don’t need all the money at once. I think it must be possible to find it. I suggest the minimum because both you and I would arrange things very economically. Now, as far as I’m concerned, I have a lot of plans, but for myself I do wish that I could spend a hundred guilders to improve my equipment. And I wish that I knew for certain that I would be able to be here for two years, say, come what may. At the moment I have so little security for the future, and I wish that I knew for sure that I wouldn’t have to leave here again in a while. 
   The plan I’m just setting out here can be changed. It seems to me that the fundamental point remains that we must manage things for two years such that we can have peace. Once the two years are up, I’ll have reached a point where I’ll be earning regularly, and I hope I’ll have regular work on such conditions that both you and I could continue in the same way. The plan is simple enough. There would be talk about you, too, but there would be 6 hours’ walking through Michels between the miserable little town of Hoogeveen and you, so you wouldn’t be in the least bit bothered by it, would you? You would be done with all of it, and by the time you’re 30 even the house of Goupil would seem to you to be something out of a dream, and you wouldn’t understand how you were once the boss on the boulevard and were treated civilly, always civilly by M. l’administrateur général. About my coming to Paris, oh, it’s a roundabout way, it seems to me, although if it’s more convenient, very well — but it’s so wholly and entirely bound up with the change you make, and if you change other than becoming a painter, I really fear that it would nevertheless have to come to that in the end, and meanwhile it would have become even more problematic. And would it then not be something for you to refresh yourself and renew yourself wholly and entirely here. Through and through, you know, renew everything, everything, through and through. I cannot write other than as I write. You’re a man of business; precisely because that’s what you are I don’t believe you’ll reject all this out of prejudice. After all, there are always financial difficulties and concerns, one can’t escape them anywhere, and fundamentally this is something solid, since it will make you into an artisan. Is that a backward step? No, it isn’t a backward step, and it seems to me that it’s the right way. It would be the act of a man, an act that calls for collier’s faith. Well then, I say, have that collier’s faith. Now, old chap, with a handshake Ever yours Vincent Do write again very soon. 
   Think of Barbizon, that’s a wonderful story. The ones who originally started there when they got there – by no means all of them were outwardly what they really were au fond. The country shaped them, all they knew was: it’s no good in the city, I must go to the country; I imagine they thought, I must learn to work, become something entirely different, yes, the opposite of what I am now. They said, I’m no good now, I’m going to renew myself in nature. At least, that’s how I reason, and although I’d go to Paris if it was absolutely necessary, and also find something to do there — I believe my future here is infinitely, infinitely better. Theo, your case is curious, almighty interesting. Dare — risk — yes, that’s what you must do; have collier’s faith all the same and even so, yes, you must have. But think now quite coolly about your highly curious position. I can’t mince my words now, old chap — don’t hold it against me — I just have to say it as it seems to me. You see a way in the art trade — as far as I can see that makes you something like Wisselingh, to mention a good man. I have great respect for Wisselingh, I like him, what you will, but even now I’d like to say to him, old chap, become a painter even now. You’re much too honest for the present-day art trade, much too clever &c. Now is not the time for it. If, on the contrary, you now persevere even more, seek your own diligence, your own craft even more and say, I won’t hesitate, I’ll risk it, I’ll push off from the shore into the open sea, you’ll get a certain sombre seriousness straightaway — something mightily serious rises up from inside — one looks at the calm shore, very well, it’s very pleasant — but the secret of the deep, the intimate, serious charm of the Ocean, of the artist’s life — with the Something on high7 above it — has taken hold of you. Very well — you aren’t a Wisselingh any more — you’re something very different. You personally are what the little boat is in a seascape by Jules Dupré. You are smaller but you are bigger — you’re an artist and you can do nothing — sure enough, your act of submission has already changed you — your own impotence or power is irrelevant here. No, the renewal of life9 makes your whole nature different, your thoughts and insights different, so that you would rather keep silent about it, and work. Your work is ugly — fine — let it be ugly — it will annoy but not discourage you. After scrabbling around for a while, lo and behold a scratch with a je ne sais quoi in it — fine — that’s the portent. It bobs up and down — now you think: it will happen, then you think: it will never work, but the longer you go on the more you’ll learn to have collier’s faith. It will become more resolute even if there are still moments of bitter melancholy. Matters of art soon become so serious that what people say about it is like the croaking of ravens. The heath speaks to you, you listen to that still voice of nature, and nature sometimes becomes a little less hostile; ultimately you are her friend. Then your work is beautiful and calm too.
 0  But nature demands some kind of submission, and she demands a period of wrestling with her. I can’t do anything else, if I speak honestly through and through I have to say, Theo, become a painter, find a way to break out and come to Drenthe. People may make a fuss, but you won’t hear much of it, a 6-hour walk through Michel landscapes lies between you and the everyday world. You would awaken, and when you got up you would find yourself by a peasant’s open peat fire with a cradle beside it. You would think better there and feel Correggio’s anche io — I too am a painter. They’d say, you aren’t — you would reply, well, well. Now, if you were here — I mustn’t echo you now, but all things considered say the same as you write to me — if you were here, I would have a comrade, and as a result my work would make better progress. You wouldn’t be without friends. You would soon have a very much more jovial rapport with Rappard than before, Wisselingh would also remain loyal to you — although he’d probably advise you against it. If you were here, I would become productive sooner, I say the same, it’s too big for me on my own, I scarcely dare attempt it on my own. I must have someone to discuss things with. Who knows what a painting is. The thing that attracts me most about Paris, that would be of most use in my progress, is actually being with you, having that friction of ideas with someone who knows what a painting is, who understands the reasonableness of the quest. I think Paris is all right because you’re in Paris, and if consequently I were less alone I would get on faster, even there. Enough about this for the moment. I don’t say that it could be done if we couldn’t afford to pay for our coarse bread and our workplace. But with what I mentioned as the minimum, I for one would very definitely cross off the impossibility. I have a simple plan for myself; I’ll go out and make whatever strikes me, fill my lungs with heathland air, believe that in a while I’ll be fresher, newer, better myself. Come on, old chap, come and paint with me on the heath, in the potato field, come and walk with me behind the plough and the shepherd — come and stare into the fire with me — just let the storm that blows across the heath blow through you. Break out. I don’t know the future, how it could be different or not, whether everything will go well for us. But all the same I can’t speak otherwise. Don’t look for it in Paris, don’t look for it in America, it’s all the same, always exactly the same. Change indeed, look for it on the heath. Regards, write soon, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  Dear brother, The thought of you is constantly with me; no wonder that I write rather often. Moreover things are sinking in a little, I’m turning things over in my mind more, things are falling into place, taking on more substance. So I can write to you about it quite calmly. First of all, I don’t see much likelihood of your remaining on good terms with G&Cie. It’s such a large firm that it will most certainly take a long time before one can’t put up with it any longer, and the decay has penetrated everywhere. But look, in my view there has already been a very long period of decay, so it wouldn’t surprise me now if it were already far advanced. Wisselingh waited — even before he left. And that was in vain — his heart was wholly in it — I believe he would much rather have stayed — but it wasn’t possible. I don’t count Arnold & Tripp, they were a very different sort with less inner life. I would, though, include Obach — he waited so long, put up with so much stress that for a time he was going out of his mind. Well, but after all, I didn’t really want to talk about the state of the firm — the negative aspect of things — because, all that aside, I wanted to talk about one positive thing. A few things have already happened to you that I consider to be not immaterial. You’ve read Zola’s books in another and better way than most — and I consider them to be among the very best about the present day. You once said to me, ‘I’m something like that character in Pot-bouille’ — I said, no. If you were that you would do well to go into a new business, but you’re deeper than him and I don’t know whether at bottom you are a man of business3 — at the very deepest depths I see in you the artist, the true artist. You have been through a deep, singular experience in your meeting with that woman. That disturbs the very deepest depths. Perhaps this is why it had to be so, because this simply had to be ploughed through. So you have had emotional experiences, unsought, that have been harrowing for you — now things are running their course. Why? Where to? To a fresh start on a similar career? My decided opinion is — no — it’s something deeper than that. Change you must — but it’s a complete re-creation, not a repetition of the same thing. You weren’t mistaken in the past; no, given the past you had to be as you were. That past is right. Does it follow from that that it was not simply a general preparation, laying the foundations, only learning the ways of the world, and not yet the real thing? Why should that not follow? It seems to me that this is precisely what it’s about. I think that things are so almighty obvious that I couldn’t possibly say anything to you that isn’t already evident — even in your own thoughts. 
   Moreover, it’s curious enough, to my mind, that there’s a change in me too at this very time. That at this very time I come into surroundings that so mightily engross me, order, regulate, fix, renew, enlarge my thoughts, that I’m wholly absorbed in them. And can write to you full of what these silent, gloomy heaths engender in me. At this very moment I feel in me the start of something better. Something that isn’t there yet, but nevertheless I see in my work things that only recently I didn’t have. Painting is coming more easily to me; I feel an urge to tackle all sorts of things that I left undone until today. I know that this coincides with such undecided circumstances that it’s far from certain that I’ll be able to stay here. Perhaps it could turn out differently precisely because of your circumstances. But I’d find that a pity, although I’d take it very calmly. But I can’t help envisaging the future as consisting not of me alone but of you and me as painters, and working together as comrades here in this peat country. The idea presents itself to me with the greatest possible coolness. The thing would have to be accomplished without the slightest fuss, without a lot of scurrying back and forth, as ‘a revolution that is because it has to be’. That’s all — and so I just say that it wouldn’t surprise me in the very least if we were together in due course, and together here. I see that it may happen without making any more stir than when a turf rolls from one spot to another. Just for a moment, and then it lies quite still again and no one takes any notice of it. Meanwhile, a person has his roots, transplanting is a painful thing, even if the soil into which he’s transplanted is better for him. And is it better??? What the Puritans were in the past, so the painters are in today’s society, in a way. It’s not a crazy, not a bombastic piety or fanaticism, it’s something simple and solid. I’m speaking here specifically of the Barbizon people, and that tendency to search for things in peasant life. I see in you, as a human being, something that’s in contradiction with Paris — so many years in Paris have washed over you — indeed a part of your heart is there — I don’t mind that at all — but something — a je ne sais quoi — is still pure. 
   That is the artistic element. It’s now weak, seemingly — but that new shoot is emerging and will soon sprout. I fear that the old trunk has been hacked through too far, and so I say, sprout in an entirely new direction, otherwise I’m afraid that the old trunk will after all prove not to have the necessary viability any more. This is how it seems to me — does it appear differently to you? All the more so because if you were to become a painter, you would as it were, without having intended it, prove to have laid a foundation for it, and at the outset you would have company, friendship, a certain environment. Would also bring about an immediate change in my own work, I believe. For I lack contact and support in my work, a certain friction of ideas with someone who knows what a painting is. I’ve been without it so much for so long that I believe I really need that stimulus. I have such plans as I hardly dare tackle alone — you would very soon learn what they are, how they fit together. I’m mightily sensitive (although I wish it were otherwise) to what’s said about my work, how I myself am received. If I encounter disbelief, stand alone, I lack a certain something, and that blights me in many initiatives. Now you would be just the person to understand it — I don’t in the least seek flattery, or that people should say ‘I think it beautiful’ when they think it ugly; no, what I want is an intelligent honesty that isn’t vexed by failures. That would say to me if I had failed 6 times, just as my courage failed me, now you really must try again for the 7th time. You see, I can’t do without that push. And I think that you would understand it and I would benefit tremendously from you. And it’s something that you would particularly be able to do if you yourself were obliged to do the same. We would support each other, because for your part you’d also get that from me, and that’s something important. Two people must believe in each other and feel that it’s possible and that it’s essential, in that way they’re almighty strong. They must keep each other’s spirits up. Well I think that you and I would understand each other. I don’t know whether you could do it if you weren’t a painter. 
   On the other hand there is doubt — which people usually try to awaken. Tersteeg, for example — who is himself a sceptic, DOES NOT KNOW what faith is. Millet, though, is the religious type. He often used the expression collier’s faith, and that expression is a mighty old one. One shouldn’t be a city person but a country person, even if one is civilized or whatever. I can’t quite explain it. There has to be a je ne sais quoi in a person that shuts his mouth and makes him active — holding something back even though he’s speaking — that spurs to action, I say, him who is inwardly silent. Thus one does something great — why? Because one has a certain feeling of ‘what will be, will be’. One works — and afterwards — I don’t know. I don’t want to hurry you, I just want to say, don’t go against nature. I don’t want anything outrageous, but I have a silent hope that one would be able to go ahead in a reasonable way, not going absolutely without, but with a relatively small part of what’s needed for food and shelter. And not if it would bring about an absolute calamity, but in the event that there’s even a very tiny possibility, I say now, you must follow that little point, that tiny little possibility — that little point is the way — follow it — utterly abandon all the rest. Don’t abandon things outwardly, hold on to such relationships as you can, but be resolute in saying I want to be a painter, so that what Tom, Dick and Harry say is like water off a duck’s back. I don’t think that you’d be like a fish out of water then, but would feel something like a return to a native country — straightaway — a great serenity right now — you would be easier about becoming a painter than about a new post, or easier than at G&Cie even. And now, old chap, there’s something else — you have a nervous system like other people — I must now warn you of something from my own experience. Take care that your nerves don’t play you a nasty trick. You’ve been through periods of dreadful strain, are right in the middle of it. Are not the man to break down — if you were, there would be no danger. If you have to undergo the shock of leaving G&Cie, calm yourself before you begin something new, old chap, because otherwise you might perhaps harm your own constitution and strength of mind for years, and secondly your affairs. 
   I’ve now been breathing heathland air for a month, I absolutely needed it too — I went and sat by a peasant’s peat fire with a cradle beside it. I speak calmly, I think calmly now. It’s very good that you wrote to me about it — keep trusting me — trust me a little bit more, or rather not me, but trust in the same thing in which I trust, that one must dare to step out of the world and to look to a quieter life with a craft. You must do it not because I tell you to, but because you believe in it yourself. Well, then I don’t have to tell you that you can trust me, because you yourself understand my seeking as being right. I don’t know how things would go with me should you not decide to become a painter. If there was a way for me in Paris I would obviously have to take that, and otherwise I would have to work out a compromise with Pa so that I could stay there and work in Brabant for a while. But oh, I must tell you that I’m not even thinking about that now, I’m thinking about my present work, and also about the plan for you. You’re a fellow with a will and with a good, rational, clear head, with an honest heart; well, you can safely become a painter in the circumstances if you could hold out for a while. And again, it would definitely give my work a push. Today I walked behind the ploughmen who were ploughing up a potato field, and women walking behind them picking up a few potatoes that were left.  This was a very different field from the one I scribbled for you yesterday, but this is the singular thing about it here, always precisely the same and yet just that variation; the same subjects as in paintings by masters who work in the same genre and yet differ, oh it’s so singular here — and so quiet, so peaceful. I can find no other word for it but peace. 
   Say a lot about it, say little about it; it’s all the same, it makes no difference. It’s a question of wanting something very new, undertaking a sort of re-creation of yourself, very coolly, with the firm idea — it’ll be fine. Not that you may not have concerns, of course, it won’t happen of its own accord, but it must be a feeling of ‘I’ll do what seems simplest to me — I’ll put aside everything that isn’t simple — I don’t want the city any more — I want to go to the country — I don’t want an office any more — I want to paint’. There you have it. Then handle it like a business matter, although it’s deeper, indeed infinitely deep, but concentrate your thoughts on it decisively. Well, in the future see yourself and me as painters. If there’s trouble, if there are objections, see it all the same — see your own work already. Look at a bit of nature — think, I want to paint that. Surrender yourself to that firm idea of becoming a painter. All at once people, even your best friends, become more or less like strangers. You’re involved with something else — precisely. All at once you think, blast, I’m dreaming, I’m on the wrong road. Where’s my studio, where’s my brush? Thoughts like these, when one feels them, are very deep. Naturally one says little or nothing about them, it would be a mistake to ask for advice about it, wouldn’t throw any more light on it for you. It’s a matter of ensuring that one doesn’t work against it; on the contrary, that one has good will, courage for it. I’m not saying that one must expect the something on High to do absolutely everything, no, but the Something on high exists, nonetheless;10 at least if Millet believed in it you’ll obviously want to trust him in this — that he wasn’t sitting dozing when he knew that it existed. Well, one may give it some thought, that’s all I’m saying, that life is serious, and a correct decision doesn’t remove the difficulties attached to carrying it out, and after all life is serious and one should take it so seriously that one does one’s best to raise one’s life to something of the kind, and so in the case of an evident need to change one must allow doing right to weigh more heavily than what people say about it. 
   What was said about it at the time won’t be brought up later and will be less important. Now, the art trade brings with it certain prejudices that I believe you may perhaps still cling to, particularly ideas that painting is a gift — well yes, a gift, but not as they make it appear; one must reach out and take it (and that taking is a difficult thing), not wait until it manifests itself of its own accord. There’s something to it, but it’s absolutely not as they make it appear, one learns by doing. One becomes a painter by painting. If one wants to become a painter, if one has passion, if one feels what you feel, then one can do it, but this can go hand in hand with difficulty, worries, disappointments, times of melancholy, of powerlessness and all that. That’s how I see it. I find it so stultifying that I had to make a little scratch to take my mind off it; forgive me, I’ll say no more about it, it’s not worth the effort.  But I would just like to say again that, as things are, this is in many respects a moment when, if bread could be found, nature is so extraordinarily interesting that you could get down to work like a shot; it wouldn’t be a matter of pottering about but a direct, fresh grappling with things, as direct as possible. We must treat the world with so much good heart, so much energy, so much coolness, not taking things too hard, you know — even if we had serious concerns — we must be cheerful like the Swedes you told me about, like the old Barbizon men. Take a large, strong, broad view. Not doubting, sitting dozing or letting ourselves be disconcerted. I’d feel at home with this plan, always much, much less at home with another plan. So I don’t doubt for one moment that you also think that, if it’s done, it must be undertaken with the greatest possible coolness. And actually write this more to show you that I have the same thought. For my part, I believe in you as a painter, as an artist, and respect you as such. 
   Even though I was at least as incapable in the beginning, and now no longer doubt that I’ll improve with practice, only after having realized my own absolute ham-fistedness, I’m perhaps a good comrade if you have trouble at first. I wouldn’t be the least surprised if I could help you on the way with some things that, my being alone, held me up for a long time while I found them out. Now I don’t know exactly how things stand, anyway it doesn’t matter; this would be something so new that relatively speaking it mattered less how things stood with this or that. But what I say is, you’ll most probably have to make a change anyway, and I’d like to see you make a change through and through. Seize the bull by the horns. The bull called fatality, which would make us all miserable and melancholy if he were the boss. From whom we can’t be free without a struggle. What do you want – peace – order – craft – art? Very well – get out of that speculative art business12 — become a painter. It would perhaps be too reckless if G&Cie now was still what G&Cie has been. But it’s now too much of a bubble company — I’m not interested in what will happen or how it will end, and actually I don’t think you are either. But your heart can’t be in it as it is now, precisely because your heart would be in it if it were different. And now, that other thing — yes that, if it has to be and it would be impossible to assure us of a period working here quietly — if you must embark on that other thing, go ahead; then I would submit, and resign myself to such circumstances as this would involve for me, either by coming to Paris or perhaps by having to stay at home for a time until circumstances improve. If it has to be so, I naturally hope I’ll be able to go along reasonably with one or the other. But I’ve said this and that about a plan I feel at home with — I don’t feel at home with the other. It’s an almighty gamble, but neither you nor I are afraid to hazard something. So think about it and in any event write soon. Regards, old chap, with a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent What should you do? But you, you will keep silent As one sees a blackcock keep silent on the heath13 you can’t act more coolly than that. Dear brother, I received your letter this morning; in many respects the contents didn’t surprise me. It does surprise me, though, that you should credit me with even the slightest grasp of affairs, since, as you know, I’m considered to be a dreamer in that respect, and I didn’t imagine that you would think any differently. I think that the idea of changing employers is a good idea of yours. To start with, you aren’t obliged to wait for the moment when the gentlemen change their minds; secondly, if one did feel so obliged, one could wait forever, or rather, until the point when a young employee has to doubt whether, if it ever did happen, he wouldn’t be too worn out to put things to rights; so how much more is this true of the old soaks themselves. By then they’d be even less competent — and decline is decline — be the deserved ruin of a business, fatally associated with certain mistakes. I wouldn’t say this if it happens through thoughtlessness, but if it happens because of that odious, bumptious, capricious, reckless way of outliving one’s reputation and taking the position of believing that everything is a question of money and that one can and may simply do anything — it may succeed many times, but in the end they’ll get into trouble, and that general manager will be the only one who comes out of it well for the time being. Oh — it’s the same old story — but of course all those departments, both unofficial and official, all that bookkeeping, it’s all just twaddle and that’s no way to do business. Surely doing business is also an action, taking hold through personal insight and willpower. That doesn’t count now — its wings are clipped — and so you complain that there aren’t enough paintings. Enough. In my view the house of G&Cie is indulging in a bubble company, and he who sows the wind reaps the whirlwind.
   I — who spent six years in it — who, although I was one of the lowliest employees, feels that something of my heart is still in it, even after more than 10 years — I find it bitterly, bitterly, bitterly sad. It’s a subject better not discussed. I don’t know the story of the firm that well, perhaps I’ve got things wrong, but this much I do know. It was very different there in the past and, I say again, I think it’s dreadful that things are going so badly now. In my view the gentlemen should have thought better of it much earlier. They started in Uncle V’s time with a few employees, whom they treated by no means so high-handedly and like machines. There was cooperation then, people could put their hearts into it then. But then the staff increased, and at the same time there gradually came to be fewer and fewer people whose hearts really were in it and who knew about it. I myself witnessed some curious instances of this. Meanwhile, the gentlemen became ever more arrogant and, in my view, they’re now absolutely blind. And if I may now speak my mind frankly, I think that the best thing that could happen to them would be for the whole thing to come to grief. In their disillusionment, it might at least be possible to respect them as human beings again, even if they were too old to put things to rights. I note with pleasure that you keep silent about them personally; that’s the best thing, and anyway I wouldn’t have expected anything else of you. But, leaving that aside, it’s something singularly difficult for you personally. Your heart is in it, and you’re more loyal to them than any of the others; I believe that you would rather stay because the house is the house, if it was endurable, even if another position would be more advantageous. All that counts for less than nothing, at least so it seems, for even if old man Goupil, for instance, felt a certain attachment to you, he would most probably say nothing about it because they themselves, I think, don’t speak out, and apparently just calmly let things mount up. Well, I see from your letter that there’s much that’s intolerable in your present situation. If, say, you were to speak to old man Goupil in confidence, it might be a good thing, saying that you had kept quiet for as long as you could, but now really had to ask, could wait no longer, exactly what the gentlemen want, because you wouldn’t want to go along with things as they are now. Something like that. There’s virtually no chance of that — it’s almost out of the question — that I know — but still. 
   Something to the effect that you would accept a situation, yet to be created instead of your present one, that wasn’t as attractive and less well-paid at first, is a fact which would be a good way of opening a few eyes if anything is, it seems to me. I don’t think something like this would lead to results, to improving matters, but whatever happened old man Goupil would trust you, and perhaps you could in any event continue to be of service to him. However, I mustn’t involve myself in situations that I’m only able to size up in the most general terms, and turn to what else you say about a plan of yours. In the circumstances — given the necessity for change — splendid — a modern business where activity can still achieve something — where people don’t run up against routine and administration that are so complicated they paralyze everything. You say there’s capital, there’s a good plant for reproduction (and that means more than capital). Now if the employers of that business are people who are serious, and if their plan is to supply good things, to seek success in honesty come what may — then, as I said, splendid. At Cottier’s, however, Wisselingh clashed too much with his employer’s character (although he never told me this, or anyone else); but I came to this conclusion myself a long time ago, and it’s consistent with what Wisselingh said, ‘I wasted my time at Cottier’s’. It was perhaps a character more inclined to grand talk than to grand deeds, so I say, those people who run that other business, are they really serious, do they really want to do it? I think that capability follows more from those two aspects than people usually say. When it comes down to it, people have to know what they want. Well, now I come to what you write about me. I would certainly very much like to spend some time in Paris, because I believe I would get the friction with artists that I’ll have to have at some point. Is it possible? It could be if it didn’t constrain you too much — I certainly like it. I wouldn’t mind talking to you about what you wrote, yes but where would that lead; better to lend a helping hand if the opportunity arose. No matter how. 
   For I should think that I would progress in my work if, for example, I had the opportunity to see more of printing. I already have several years of practising painting &c. behind me, so I carry on with it. But if I were to work at a printer’s or something, it would help rather than hinder me — although I would have to learn it all — but I think that I could draw reproductions myself, for instance. And I’d like to try everything of that kind, particularly if there’s bread to be earned from it there. I really do believe that I’ll get to the point where I won’t have to do anything else; however, be assured that I’d have no objections to a plan to come to Paris if you believed that it might do some good or was more appropriate for one reason or another. Well, I am not qualified to advise YOU about business; I’ve been out of it too long, and if I were to come back we should be in complete agreement about very many things. And yet I know that I’ve seen what I’ve seen and, in questions of reproduction or publishing, yes I also know what’s beautiful. If possible I want to lend a helping hand about how to do it, in any way I can. But now, here in this magnificent heathland, I don’t have to tell you that I have absolutely no hankering for Paris, and I wouldn’t give it a thought if your letter hadn’t given cause to do so. And I simply say about this: if that’s the way it turns out, fine, to Paris; if that’s the way it turns out, fine, here in the peat fields. There will certainly be something to paint everywhere. It’s exceedingly beautiful here and, as I paint, I believe that I’m learning to paint a little better. Well, my heart is in it, you know that. I also believe, moreover, that if one knows a craft, after all, a craft is the most solid means of existence, so all the more reason for me to continue seeking it there. I would go further — should we be together in Paris for one reason or another, because there was no choice or it was more convenient, then I dare say to you even now: start drawing and I’ll clarify the first principles for you. 
   I know how much I still have to learn myself, but all the same I’m beginning to see light ahead of me and, one way or another, by practising on my own, by learning anything I can use from others, I’ll continue to paint with passion.  And might you reach a point where you could see light in it, well, so much the better. For you say that your heart is in the art business. That’s as may be, but I believe it’s even more in art itself. Well, old chap, write again soon — I’ll start thinking all sorts of dreadful things if you keep quiet about it. So if there’s something the matter, write: there’s something the matter; if there’s nothing the matter, write: there’s nothing the matter, but don’t keep completely silent about it, because it’s not worth it. Oh — I’ve had a letter from the poor woman — was glad I’d written to her, but is worried about the children and is going out to work as a temporary help. Has to live at her mother’s. Poor souls. We just have to have courage — even if it doesn’t come naturally. I’m scratching a few more things from around here. I can’t describe to you how beautiful the countryside is. When I paint a bit better — then! Arrange things for me exactly as it works out best; I’d learn here and also learn there, I think. Well, however it goes, it seems to me that you’ll be no unhappier because of it, and perhaps you’ve already put up with things for too long. Should it turn out that the gentlemen appreciated you more and gave you greater freedom to do business as you understand it, I think that would be the best thing. But I’d be surprised if matters took that turn, since even Uncle Vincent himself wasn’t treated very well when he left.
   But that aside — it occurs to me that the whole art trade is sick — to tell you what I really think, I doubt whether the appalling prices will hold, even for masterpieces. A je ne sais quoi enveloped it and cooled the business down — and enthusiasm has crept into its shell. Does this make much difference to the artists? Not really, because the greatest among them usually profited personally from the enormous prices only in recent years, when they were already at the top, and they — Millet and others, particularly Corot — wouldn’t have painted any less, or less beautifully, if that huge boom hadn’t taken place. And whatever may happen in the art trade, for years to come anyone who can do something that’s worth looking at will always find art lovers who will make it possible for him to earn enough to live on. Well, I’d rather have 150 francs a month as a painter than 1, francs a month as anything else, even as an art dealer. As a painter, one feels one is a human being among other human beings, it seems to me — more so than when one is living a life that’s founded more on speculation, and where one has to be mindful of the conventions.  Although I’m curious as to how all this will turn out, it’s all the same to me, one way or the other. And as for you, I still don’t see it as a misfortune, this hasn’t been proved to me at all, on the contrary, if the outcome were to be that you became a painter in your 30th year, say, I should think it a great good fortune. Real life only begins at 30, that being the most active part. Friends and family regard one as old and I don’t know what else, but that doesn’t alter the fact that one can nonetheless feel a renewal of energy in oneself. What’s necessary then is to think things through thoroughly, and to want and be awake. But a change at around that time is actually necessary. One has to sweep all the rubbish into a heap and start again. Just like when one started out as a boy — but with more maturity. Dick or Harry, who just sits there dozing, thinks this is crazy and says he has grave misgivings about it — very well — take Dick or Harry as he is, provided he doesn’t attack you; he’s no more awake than a sleep-walker. For oneself, one must have no doubt, it’s only natural, and it’s only by not changing that one goes against nature. There’s an old saying — they have ears but they hear not, they have eyes but they see not, they have a heart but they understand not; their heart is waxed gross and they have closed their eyes and ears because they DO not WANT to hear and DO not WANT to see. I think that you and I are honest enough, after all, not to need to be afraid of opening our eyes and looking at things as they are and occur. 
   That pithy old saying says such an enormous amount, says it all so exactly that I’m forced to think of it again and again in connection with many, many things.  These were peat loaders, but I’m afraid the scratches are absolutely indecipherable. 
    Here are a couple of evening effects10 — I’m still working on that weed burner, whom I’ve caught better than before in a painted study as far as the tone is concerned, so that it conveys more of the vastness of the plain and the gathering dusk, and the small fire with the wisp of smoke is the only point of light. I kept going out to look at it in the evenings, and one muddy evening after the rain I found the little hut, which was very beautiful in its natural setting. Again, I think that I’d be able to learn in Paris as well as here on the heath; in the city I’d have the opportunity to learn from other people and see what they were doing, and I’m by no means indifferent to that. For that matter, I think that I’d also make progress working here without seeing other painters. And for my pleasure, I would far rather stay here. However, if a change in your position were to make it desirable for me to come there, perhaps earn something in the same firm, that’s all right with me and I have no objection whatsoever.  Don’t hesitate to write to me about all these things, which I will, of course, keep entirely and absolutely to myself. If my affairs here were to improve a little — if, for example, I could count on C.M. taking my studies — well, seeing as it’s cheaper here, the most advantageous would be if I were to stay here, and once I progressed a bit further, if you ever changed entirely and decided to become a painter, it would be excellent to learn here — excellent. Has C.M. been yet? I repeat, keep your courage up, I’ll do the same, and if you do ever decide to become a painter, do it with inner cheerfulness and as coolly as possible. Then, taking the broad view of things, you would have to see the time between now and your 30th year as a rather wretched period of pottering around, but at the end of it you would see everything renewed, and a broad future. Remember what you told me about the Swedish painters in Paris back then — one must be daring, and all the more so because one sees how everything is uncertain and shaky. Forlorn attempts — so be it — but in an age like the one we live in they are our duty, and one must often choose between that and sitting dozing. Well, old chap, all the best, write again soon, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear brother, It’s Sunday today and you’re never out of my thoughts. As to these things, I’d find ‘the longer you stay there, the more bored you’ll be’ very applicable to business; ‘the more you’ll enjoy yourself’ to painting — enjoy here in a serious sense of a zest for life, good spirits, energy. Oh — I said we should by all means take Tom, Dick and Harry as they are1 — by all means — let’s do that, but apart from taking one thing and another as it is, isn’t there something absurd about these forms and conventions, aren’t they truly bad? Maintaining a certain status fosters certain base acts, insincerities — to be done willingly and knowingly with premeditation. That’s what I call the fatal side, even of the black ray, let alone where there’s no question of any ray at all. Now take the Barbizon painters, not only do I understand them as people, but in my view everything, the tiniest, most intimate particulars, sparkles with spirit and life. The ‘painters’ household’ with its great and petty vexations, with its calamities, with its Sorrows and griefs4 — it has a certain good will in its favour, a certain sincerity, a certain genuinely human quality. Precisely by not maintaining a certain status, not even thinking about it — if you take enjoying in the most serious sense of ‘finding it interesting’ — for my part I call that ‘enjoying’. And then about that certain status ‘boring, stupefying’. Do I say this because I despise refinement or something? — just the very opposite, because I regard and respect the genuinely human, living with nature — not going against nature — as refinement. I ask, what most makes me a human being. Zola says — I, an artist, I want to live life to the full5 — want to live without ulterior motive — naive as a child, no not as a child, as an artist — with good will, just as life unfolds, so I’ll find something in it, so I’ll do my best in it. 
   Now take all the prearranged airs, the conventional, how hugely priggish it actually is, how absurd it is, a person who thinks that he knows it all and that things go as he thinks — as if there wasn’t always a je ne sais quoi of almighty good and also an element of evil in all things in life, which one feels as something infinite above us, infinitely bigger, more powerful than us. A person who doesn’t feel small — who doesn’t realize that he’s a speck — what a fundamental mistake he makes. Does one lose something by abandoning some notions, drummed into us as children, of preserving status — of regarding certain manners as No. 1? For myself, I don’t even think about whether I lose or don’t lose by it, I only know that my experience is that these forms and notions don’t hold water and are often even fatal, yes are decidedly bad. I come to the conclusion that I don’t know anything, but at the same time that the life we are in is such a mystery that the system of ‘Respectability’ is certainly too narrow — so, for me, that has lost its credit. What shall I do now? — the customary term is ‘What is your aim, what is your aspiration?’ — oh, I shall do what I shall do — how? I don’t know beforehand — do you, who ask me this priggish question: what is your aim, what is your aspiration? Now people say ‘you lack character if you have no aim, no aspiration’. My answer: I didn’t tell you that I had no aim, no aspiration; I said that I found it unspeakably priggish to want to force someone to define what is indefinable. So these are my thoughts on certain questions about life. The whole discussion about them is one of the things that I describe as ‘boring’. Live — do something — and that’s more enjoyable, that’s more positive. In short. A kind of taking society as it is but feeling oneself completely free, not believing in one’s own intellect but in ‘reason’; believing my own intellect, although I don’t confuse that with ‘reason’ — (my intellect is human, reason is divine, but there’s a link between the one and the other), my own conscience is the compass that shows me the way, although I know that it doesn’t work exactly accurately.
   What I wanted to say is that when I look back at the past generation of painters, I remember an expression you used, ‘they were SURPRISINGLY cheerful’. I now want to say that if you were to become a painter, you would have to do it with something of that same surprising cheerfulness. You need it as a counterweight against the melancholy aspect of the situation. You do more with that than with anything else. You must have a certain genius, I don’t know another word for it, which is the exact opposite of what people call ‘ponderous’. Do not, of course, tell me that neither you nor I could have that ourselves. I say it because I believe that we must do our best to become thus, I don’t claim that either you or I are already sufficiently thus — I say, let’s do our best in that regard — because I want to show you in these letters that in my opinion you aren’t mistaken, although I believe that you understand what I think about one thing and another anyway. In my view, the whole plan would gain immeasurably if it could be linked to your remaining with the woman you’re with. And that if you feel that it’s in your nature and hers even to have a degree of pleasure — a surprising cheerfulness — in the face of the situation — a je ne sais quelle surprising youthfulness — and I don’t reckon that among the impossibilities — you said she was intelligent — well then, you can do more together than alone. And in this case, if people of the same sentiment, people in the same rather serious misfortune, should join forces to see it through together, I say the more the merrier. And I say — if this was so or came to pass, this joining together to work one’s way through, this is something that’s infinitely more than all the forms, and rises above ‘what will they say’. 
   And wanted to tell you the people here don’t seem to me to be unpleasant or scheming. There’s something benevolent here, and I believe that you could do exactly what suits you best here. There is here — a surprisingly youthful atmosphere. I know that all these things have an inevitable financial aspect, but I say, let’s weaken this inevitable money side as much as possible, in the first place by not being too afraid of it, and by feeling that if one sets to work with love, with a singular understanding of one another and working together and supporting one another, this would alleviate many things that would otherwise be unbearable, indeed sometimes change them utterly. For myself, if there were a few people with whom one could talk about art, who would, and would want to, feel — I would gain immensely for my own work — I would feel myself more, be myself more. If there’s enough money for us to hold out for an initial period, I’ll be earning by the time it runs out. The more I think about it, the more it seems to me to be as I originally felt it. Your heart is partly in the house of G&Cie, but G&Cie don’t ask for that, demand unreasonable things in their overconfidence. In the first place this is a great blow for you, something that causes you much inner pain. This isn’t just a question of money, you have your heart in it, it’s a heartache. You’ll embark on a similar career with that heartache, perhaps with a similar result again. Look, can this be done? I tell you that I doubt it — that it seems to me that you, who are very young, would not be reckless if you were to argue: I’ve had enough of the art trade but not of art, I’ll abandon the trade and I’ll look to the heart of the profession itself. I should have done that at the time. The fact that I made a mistake was an error in point of view, understandable, perhaps, because I didn’t know then how things were regarding teaching or evangelism — knew nothing about them — and had ideals about them. You’ll say, can’t one also develop ideals about art that don’t hold water in existing situations? Well, answer that for yourself; I also answer it for myself by asking, is Barbizon, is the Dutch school of painters, a fact or not a fact? Whatever else the art world may be, it isn’t rotten. On the contrary, it has got better and better — and perhaps it has already reached the highest peak, but we’re still very close to it in any event, and as long as you and I live, even if we were to live to 100, there will be a certain gusto of a real kind. So if people want to paint — buckle down to it. If the woman came, of course she’d have to paint too. Everyone should paint here. The wife of one of the Van Eycks had to do it too.
    With the greatest possible good heart, cheerfulness, enthusiasm, one would have to begin by saying, none of us can do anything and yet we are painters. Action follows from our intent. That’s what the idea has to be, it seems to me. We live from day to day — if we don’t work ‘like a bunch of negroes’12 then we’ll have to die of hunger and cut the most ridiculous figures. We simply have a tremendous aversion to that, and so we have to and we shall. It couldn’t be done by people who didn’t have something of what I’ll simply call surprising youthfulness — and at the same time a seriousness that was damned serious. The — putting your heart and soul into it. Now — if it were a speculation I wouldn’t be able to think about it like this — but here it’s a battle to escape from the world of convention and speculation. It’s something good, something peaceful, a just enterprise. We’ll certainly endeavour to earn our bread, but then definitely in the literal sense. Money leaves us cold except as far as it’s needed for the absolute essentials of life. We do nothing of which we have to be ashamed. We can openly stroll about the countryside and work, with what Carlyle calls quite a royal feeling. We can work because we’re honest. We say, we made a mistake when we were children, or rather we had to do what we were told then, and do what we did to earn our living. Later, this and that happened, and then we deemed it advisable to become artisans. Because certain situations were too pretentious for us. If you were to talk to people about it, I think they’d all advise against it &c. Perhaps only the woman you’re with wouldn’t. If you’ve made a decision for yourself, avoid people so that they can’t sap your willpower. At the very moment when one hasn’t yet shed one’s superficial awkwardness, isn’t yet polished, a ‘good for nothing’15 is enough 
   to cause despondency for six months, until one eventually sees after all that one shouldn’t have let oneself be disoriented. There are two people whose intense struggle between ‘I’m a painter’ and ‘I’m not a painter’ I know. Rappard’s and my own — sometimes a frightening struggle, a struggle that’s precisely the distinction between us and some others who take it less seriously. For ourselves, we sometimes feel wretched, at the end of a spell of melancholy there’s a little light, a little progress; some others have less of a struggle, perhaps work more easily, yet their personal character also develops less. You would also have this struggle, and I say you must be aware that you run the risk of being put off by people who doubtless have the very best of intentions. If something in you yourself says ‘you aren’t a painter’ — IT’S THEN THAT YOU SHOULD PAINT, old chap, and that voice will be silenced too, but precisely because of that. Anyone who goes to his friends and complains about his troubles when he feels like that loses something of his manliness, something of the best that’s in him. Your friends can only be those who fight against it themselves, rouse the active in you through their own example of action.  
   One must take it up with assurance, with a conviction that one is doing something reasonable, like the peasant guiding his plough or like our friend in the scratch, who is doing his own harrowing. If one has no horse, one is one’s own horse — a lot of people do that here. You must regard it not as a change — as a deeper penetration. You’ve learned to see art over the years — now you go on, already knowing what you want to make. Don’t think that this is a little thing. You can be decisive, you know what you want. There’s a saying of Gustave Doré’s that I’ve always found exceedingly beautiful — I have the patience of an ox18 — right away I see something good in it, a certain resolute honesty; in short there’s a lot in that saying, it’s a real artist’s saying. When one thinks about people from whose mind something like this springs, it seems to me that the sort of arguments one all too often hears in the art trade about ‘gift’ is such a hideous croaking of ravens. ‘I have the patience’, how calm that is, how dignified that is. They wouldn’t even say that if it weren’t precisely because of all that croaking of ravens. I’m not an artist — how coarse that is — even to think it of oneself — should one not have patience, not learn patience from nature, learn patience from seeing the wheat slowly come up, the growing of things — should one think oneself such a hugely dead thing that one believed one wouldn’t grow? Should one deliberately discourage one’s development? I say this to show why I find it so silly to talk about gifts and no gifts. But if one wants to grow, one must fall into the earth. So I say to you, plant yourself in the soil of Drenthe — you will sprout there. Don’t shrivel up on the pavement. You’ll say that there are city plants — well yes, but you are wheat and belong in the wheatfield.
   Well, I too foresee that, perhaps for financial reasons, now cannot be the moment, but at the same time that perhaps the circumstances would just make it possible. And if there were only half a possibility, it’s my opinion that you would do well to risk it. I don’t believe that you would ever regret it. You would develop the best that is in you, have a more peaceful life. Neither of us would be alone, our work would flow together. We might have frightening moments at the outset, we’d prepare ourselves for them and arrange things in such a way that we had to withstand them, couldn’t turn back. Not look behind us nor be able to look behind us, actually force ourselves to look forward. But it’s precisely then that we’re far away from all friends and acquaintances, we fight the fight without anyone seeing us, and that’s best, other people can only hinder us. We see victory ahead — we feel it in us. We’ll be so busy working that we won’t be able to do anything but think positively about the work. I don’t suppose in the least that I’m telling you anything new, I just ask, don’t go against your own best thoughts. Think about that idea of looking at things with a certain cool, good heart rather than with gloominess. I see that even in Millet; he couldn’t help being of good heart, precisely because he was so serious. This is something specific, not to all schools of painting, but to the school of Millet, Israëls, Breton, Boughton, Herkomer, several others. In short, those who seek the really simple are themselves so simple, and their view of life is so full of good will and good heart, even in misfortune. Think about these things, write about these things. It must be a revolution that is, because it’s necessary that it should be20 — the most self-evident thing in the world for you and for me, so I write about it calmly and I have no doubt you’ll also think about it calmly. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear brother — I cannot count the grains of corn in a sack of corn just by smelling it — I cannot see through the planks in the barn door — but I can sometimes see from the bulges whether it’s a sack of potatoes or corn; or again, even if the barn door is shut, I can tell from the squealing that the pig’s being slaughtered. And so I can only, will only consider the situation in which you presently find yourself in so far as I have information, albeit vague, to make sense of it, and it isn’t by way of prediction. But to the point. Consider cool-headedly whether what you’re facing here is what they call fatality on the field of battle. Consider the faces of your friends, false friends, enemies, consider all the — je ne sais quoi’s — consider whether a certain void is forming around you so that you no longer have any handholds, at least are able to tie things up less easily. In short, consider whether fatality is For or decidedly Against. Tell me this one thing, whether it’s a mistake on my part when I think that I see in some phenomena that you’re dealing here with one of those malignant crises2 that sometimes tend to crop up in big businesses and big cities? Again, is the aspect of the things — fatal? — do you feel: there’s nothing to be done about this? — or do you feel: redress is possible, there’s no reason to change as yet?
   For myself, unless you were to write to me yourself: no it isn’t that bad — for myself I see that the affair has a fairly fatal look. Think about it cool-headedly — I know that you have your calmness, your presence of mind — I know that you’re trying to analyze it, and so I just wanted to know whether you yourself see anything of that which I fear is the case. Now, old chap, as long as the situation was tolerable — as long as business could be done, well I’ve never dared to come right out and say, get out of it, above all respecting your position, because you didn’t do it for your own pleasure but for the sake of the welfare of us all. But your former duties, which, moreover, you assumed voluntarily, cease to be duties in the event that the state of affairs is such that going on wouldn’t only be fighting a losing battle, but at the same time would inevitably result in your being crushed. In short, there’s a thus far and no further, and my premonition is that you’re close to it. Look here — about now or ever — making yourself scarce or disappearing — neither you nor I must ever do that, any more than a suicide. I myself also have my moments of great melancholy, but the thought: disappear, make yourself scarce, must, 
   I repeat, be regarded by me and by you as not befitting us.  Against the risk of going on all the same when one feels it isn’t possible, going on with the desperate feeling that it must end in a disappearance, our conscience argues with a BEWARE!!!4 If I’m wrong, if my premonitions don’t square with the facts I’m asking you about, if they do or do not have the decidedly fatal aspect — well then I’ll believe your simple statement: ‘I do see a chance of one thing and another working out’ (or similar information) when you write to tell me so. If it’s a fait accompli that here you’re dealing with one of those vicious crises such as Paris, London produce — if that’s so decidedly in the air that you feel that it’s a force that would crush, if by trying to oppose it, one would force the worst to happen — then, abandon the wreck and concentrate your attention and energy not on preserving your present position, but on creating something completely new. For a long time now it has seemed to me that your duty was too complicated — my view is that your duty should be a simple thing, and the present situation would become more complicated the longer it went on, and more doubtful as to whether or not it really was duty; furthermore that through painting you’ll presently find a very clear duty, a very simple, straight path for your feet.
   My idea is that continuing as at present would prove to be not only more and more intolerable but moreover less and less profitable. I don’t say this about G&Cie alone, but also about you as a dealer in general. I don’t say that you and I will get rich together, but we’ll be able to maintain our aplomb and equilibrium, even though — this I cannot deny — we’ll have a very hard struggle in the first few years. Yet, above our enterprise of painting I see not fatality against but for, but you would, I fear, crush not just yourself but me too by wanting to go ahead with what, in my opinion, really goes against the grain. In the first place we wouldn’t be able to support each other and each of us would stand too much alone. In the second place, we’d cause each other to waver by working in diametrically opposed directions so that, despite our friendship, we’d turn our backs on each other now and then. Well, old chap, for me painting is too logical, too reasonable, too straightforward for me to make a change. Well, you yourself helped me carry through the idea of a craft;6 I know that basically it’s your own idea too, and so it seems to me that we should go on to work together. My reason, my conscience compels me to tell you what in part are also your own ideas, there’s nothing for it but to undertake a radical renewal. I know that my words will stand out oddly against what other people would say if you consulted them; they’d dismiss it with ‘it will turn out all right’, ‘the desired changes will happen’. I wasn’t to flatter you; very well, I don’t flatter. And as far as inspiring you with courage, yes, I do dare to do that, I dare to inspire you with the very highest, most cheerful courage and serenity, but only for painting, and as to Paris only this — take a good look and see whether you don’t have fate against you on that battlefield. Now, with a hearty handshake Ever yours Vincent — 
   Now then, the countryside here is very singular. Just suppose you were asked whether you’d want to be a painter if you could suddenly be transported to the era 40 years ago, when things were as they were when Corot &c. were young – also that you wouldn’t be alone but would have a comrade. Why I ask this — because in the countryside here, where people haven’t yet progressed beyond diligence and barge, where everything is much purer than I’ve ever seen anywhere, I feel exactly as though I myself had been transported to the aforementioned time. You have seen Drenthe — from the train, in haste, long ago. But remotest Drenthe, if you come here, will make a very different impression on you, and even you will feel just as if you were living in the age of Van Goyen, Ruisdael, Michel; in short, in what one scarcely finds now even in present-day Barbizon. It seems to me that this is something important, because nature like this can sometimes awaken in a mind things that would otherwise never have woken. I mean something of that free, cheerful spirit of the past, I mean that nervous wavering can be silenced that way. Yet I believe that alone in a region like this one could be held up and become dull through lack of company. And for myself, I really long for your collaboration. I think about you, however, not first and foremost for my sake; I think about you first and foremost for your sake, although these also run together, although they also enhance each other. What I see is that hanging on in Paris, even if you could keep it up for years more, will nonetheless not bring you peace, and will also not be as useful to other people as painting. 
   I see that Paris will put you in what I would call a false position in regard to your own duty. I’ll leave being useful to others out of it, I don’t know whether this would truly remain sound in the long term because you focus other, stupider minds on Paris, a thought that upsets those very people, because they’d be intoxicated by it. Make no mistake: everything had its reason until now, but in my view the signs of the times point to a change of direction now, in a very different and much more decisive way than ever happened before. This is not about weakening or giving up; on the contrary it’s about striking calamity to the heart, planting in better soil the same energetic principle of wanting to rise. The calamity leaves us our same courage and serious will. Let the world spitefully say what it wouldn’t refrain from saying, that can leave you and me cold. And on the contrary, for ourselves, we’re counting on a difficult life which has a goal other than earning as much money as we might perhaps do. Our goal, first and foremost, is to reform ourselves through craft and contact with nature, believing that it’s our duty first and foremost, precisely so that we can remain straight with other people, and consistent. Our goal is ‘walking with God’8 — as against living amid the affairs of the big cities. We’ll do no one any harm by it.   Our belief is that, yes – although, to some people, it seems hypocritical to say this — our belief, I say, is that God helps those who help themselves9 in so far as they concentrate their endeavours and attention on that and roll up their sleeves to that end. 
   The longer I think about it the more I see that Millet believes in a something on High. He speaks of it very differently from Pa, for instance — for he leaves it more vague, yet I see more in Millet’s vagueness than in Pa. And I see the same as in Millet in Rembrandt, in Corot, in Breton, in Brion, in short in the work of several people, although I don’t hear them hold forth about it. The end of things doesn’t have to be an ability to explain but to base oneself on it effectively. In short, Theo, a certain indeterminate but nonetheless fixed feeling in me that it’s the first duty to direct the heart upwards12 leads me, as brother and as friend to a brother and a friend, to ask you to consider directing yourself towards a life founded on simpler principles. Principles that I can’t define other than: sensing that duty is unlikely to bring someone to the Paris business, but rather points to retiring from it. Can you share this sense to some extent? Think about it, reflect on it; if you need time for it, put yourself to the test and take your time. Any hesitation along the lines of ‘I’m not an artist’, though, only seems justified to me in so far as it doesn’t stand in the way of doing what you have to do and I have to do to become one. Neither we ourselves nor other people can fully explain the extent to which we are not one, the extent to which we are. Only the How to do it system13 involves saying I’ll do my best to do it, asking no such questions;14 in my view the How not to do it system is only that which says ‘I know in advance that I can’t do it anyway’. 
   One isn’t sure of one’s case all at once, one knows nothing in advance other than very vaguely, but nevertheless something called conscience is a sort of compass for man to distinguish between this direction and that — between north and south, between right and left — broadly. Consequently, in spite of chance currents, in spite of deceptively friendly-looking coasts, to say, yes, but fundamentally this isn’t the right direction. And there you have it, earning money in Paris, even for other people, particularly given your recent experiences, seems to me to be a deceptive fata Morgana, a coast that would recede further and further away the more you continued to try to land there, meanwhile carrying you further and further away from your proper direction. I respect all your hesitations and doubt, I respect your weighing up the pros and cons, I don’t seek to force you to decide at once. But I just point out to you very, very seriously and decidedly that it seems to me to be a fact that you’re standing at a fork in the road and must reflect before you set out, before you just persevere with Paris. The signs of the times, not I, tell you: Hold on! what do you want? If you want Paris, very well — if you can make up your mind to that, so be it — then I wouldn’t interfere in it, but it won’t be that easy, and I’m afraid you could run up against fatality. I strongly doubt whether you’ll preserve your peace as a result. I see everything against painting except fatality, I see everything for Paris except fatality. Fatality in which I see with an inexpressible feeling God, Who is ‘the white Ray’16 and has the last word: what isn’t good through and through isn’t good and doesn’t endure; and against whom even the black ray is powerless. What you’re facing is something terrible, something awful — things are so inexpressible that I have no words for them, that were I not your brother and your friend, who would regard keeping silent as ungrateful and hardly humane, I would say nothing. Well, seeing as you say, in the first place inspire me with courage, in the second place don’t flatter me, I say: well then, I see this and that in it, here on the silent heath where I feel God high above you and me.  With a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother, Just wanted to tell you about a trip to Zweeloo, the village where Liebermann stayed for a long time and made studies for his painting of the washerwomen at the last Salon. Where Ter Meulen and Jules Bakhuyzen also spent some time. Imagine a trip across the heath at 3 o’clock in the morning in an open cart (I went with the man where I lodge, who had to go to the market in Assen). Along a road, or ‘diek’ as they say here, which they’d put mud on to raise it instead of sand. It was much nicer even than the barge. When it was only just starting to get a little lighter and the cocks were crowing everywhere by the huts scattered over the heath, the few cottages we passed — surrounded by slender poplars whose yellow leaves one could hear falling — an old squat tower5 in a little churchyard with earth bank and beech hedge, the flat landscapes of heath or wheatfields, everything, everything became just exactly like the most beautiful Corots. A silence, a mystery, a peace as only he has painted. It was still very dark, though, when we got to Zweeloo at 6 o’clock in the morning — I saw the real Corots even earlier in the morning. The ride into the village was really so beautiful. Huge mossy roofs on houses, barns, sheepfolds, sheds. The dwellings here are very wide, among oak trees of a superb bronze. Tones of golden green in the moss, of reddish or bluish or yellowish dark lilac greys in the soil, tones of inexpressible purity in the green of the little wheatfields. Tones of black in the wet trunks, standing out against golden showers of whirling, swirling autumn leaves, which still hang in loose tufts, as if they were blown there, loosely and with the sky shining through them, on poplars, birches, limes, apple trees. The sky unbroken, clear, illuminating, not white but a lilac that cannot be deciphered, white in which one sees swirling red, blue, yellow, which reflects everything and one feels above one everywhere, which is vaporous and unites with the thin mist below. Brings everything together in a spectrum of delicate greys. 
   I didn’t find a single painter in Zweeloo, though, and the people said they never come there in the winter. It’s precisely in the winter that I hope to be there. Since there were no painters, I decided to walk back and do some drawing on the way instead of waiting for my landlord’s return.  So I started to make a sketch of the very apple orchard where Liebermann made his large painting. And then back along the road we had driven down early on. At the moment that area around Zweeloo is entirely given over to young wheat — vast, sometimes, that most tender of tender greens that I know. With above it a sky of a delicate lilac white that gives an effect — I don’t think it can be painted, but for me it’s the basic tone that one must know in order to know what the basis of other effects is. A black earth, flat — infinite — a clear sky of delicate lilac white. That earth brings forth that young wheat — it’s as if that wheat is a growth of mould. That’s what the good, fertile fields of Drenthe are, au fond — everything in a vaporous atmosphere. Think of the Last day of creation by Brion7 — well, yesterday I felt that I understood the meaning of that painting. The poor soil of Drenthe is the same, only the black earth is even blacker — like soot — not a lilac black like the furrows, and melancholically overgrown with eternally rotting heather and peat. I see that everywhere — the chance effects on that infinite background: in the peat bogs the sod huts, in the fertile areas, really primitive hulks of farmhouses and sheepfolds with low, very low walls, and huge mossy roofs. Oaks around them. When one travels for hours and hours through the region, one feels as if there’s actually nothing but that infinite earth, that mould of wheat or heather, that infinite sky. Horses, people seem as small as fleas then. One feels nothing any more, however big it may be in itself, one only knows that there is land and sky. 
   However, in one’s capacity as a tiny speck watching other tiny specks — leaving aside the infinite — one discovers that every tiny speck is a Millet. I passed a little old church, just exactly, just exactly the church at Gréville in Millet’s little painting in the Luxembourg;9 but here, instead of the little peasant with the spade in that painting, a shepherd with a flock of sheep came along the hedge. One didn’t see through to the sea in the background but only to the sea of young wheat, the sea of furrows instead of that of the waves. The effect produced: the same. I saw ploughmen, very busy now, a sand-cart, shepherds, road workers, dung-carts. In a little inn along the way drew a little old woman at the spinning wheel, little dark silhouette — like something out of a fairy tale — little dark silhouette against a bright window through which one saw the bright sky and a path through the delicate green and a few geese cropping the grass. And then, when dusk fell — imagine the silence, the peace of that moment! Imagine, right then, an avenue of tall poplars with the autumn leaves, imagine a broad muddy road, all black mud with the endless heath on the right, the endless heath on the left, a few black, triangular silhouettes of sod huts, with the red glow of the fire shining through the tiny windows, with a few pools of dirty, yellowish water that reflect the sky, where bogwood trunks lie rotting. Imagine this muddy mess in the evening twilight with a whitish sky above, so everything black on white. And in this muddy mess a rough figure — the shepherd — a throng of oval masses, half wool, half mud, that bump into one another, jostle one another — the flock. You see it coming — you stand in the midst of it — you turn round and follow them.
   With difficulty and reluctantly they progress along the muddy road. Still, there’s the farm in the distance — a few mossy roofs and piles of straw and peat between the poplars. Again the sheepfold is like a triangle in silhouette. Dark. The door stands wide open like the entrance to a dark cave. The light from the sky behind shines through the cracks in the boards at the back. The whole caravan of masses of wool and mud disappears into this cave — the shepherd and a woman with a lantern shut the doors behind them. That return of the flock in the dusk was the finale of the symphony that I heard yesterday. That day passed like a dream, I had been so immersed in that heart-rending music all day that I had literally forgotten even to eat and drink — I took a slice of coarse peasant bread and a cup of coffee at the little inn where I drew the spinning wheel. The day was over, and from dawn to dusk, or rather from one night to the other night, I had forgotten myself in that symphony. I came home and, sitting by the fire, it occurred to me that I was hungry, and I found I was terribly hungry. But that’s how it is here. One feels exactly as if one had been at an exhibition of one hundred masterpieces, for example. What does one get out of a day like that? Just a few scratches. And yet one gets something else out of it, too — a calm passion for work. Above all, do write to me soon. It’s Friday today but your letter isn’t here yet; I’m looking forward to it eagerly. It takes time to get it changed, since it has to go back to Hoogeveen again and then back here again. We don’t know how it will work out, but apart from that I would now say — the simplest thing perhaps would be to send money once a month. In any event write again soon. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, What I think is the best life, oh without even the slightest shadow of a doubt, is a life made up of long years of being in touch with nature out of doors — and with the something on high1 — unfathomable, ‘awfully Unnameable’, because one can’t find a name for it — above that nature. Be a peasant — be, if that were fitting at the present time, a village clergyman or schoolmaster — be, and given the present time that’s the form that seems to me to be the most fitting, be a Painter — and in so doing as a person you will, after that spell of years of outdoor life and manual work, as a person you will, in the end and in the passage of years, gradually become something better and deeper. I firmly believe this. In my view, the way one starts out, cleverer, not so clever, with more or with fewer privileges of favourable circumstances, is far from being the most important thing. If one starts on it one must only do it with the belief in the need to be in touch with nature, with the belief that if one takes that path one can’t go wrong, and walks straightest. And — added to that is just precisely that if one had things easy, a sort of living on private means, it would be of very little help, for it is precisely many a hard day, precisely many forlorn attempts, that make someone better. And what I believe does a great deal of good is if one doesn’t work absolutely alone, because the work inevitably absorbs one, but one doesn’t become lost in that absorption because each advises the other, can keep the other on the right path. If you were to talk to people, they’d say to you, what are you thinking of, what a reckless gamble to give up this and that, etc. In short, people would think it crazy — think it a mistake. 
   For myself, I would think the recklessness must lie in a different outlook on life from the one I’m talking about — that of Painter — I think reckless is precisely binding oneself irrevocably to the city and city affairs. People will tell you, you’re a fanatic and you don’t foresee the future — in my view you do foresee the future, in my view in a period like the one you’re in now, certainly after such emotional experiences as you have had, one can’t be fanatical then, one is in a period of disenchantment. People needn’t try to twist things with me, that won’t wash with me. I feel my own incurable melancholy about the way one thing and another has gone, and they try to tell me I was in a mood of ‘rash, youthful fanaticism’. Far, very far from it. In your frame of mind one is in damned earnest. It isn’t something soft, something sweet that you think you will find; no, you know that it will be a fight as if with a rock;3 no, you know that nature can’t be conquered or made submissive without a terrible fight, without more than the ordinary level of patience. And people would imagine your state of mind, if one were to talk about becoming a painter, as a delusion of a bed of roses. I ask you, what do people who might only vaguely begin to think that way know about it? That’s the way the world is, though, but that’s only one of its enormities when it comes to misunderstanding, by no means the worst. It’s precisely because of this deadly contrariness of public opinion that it’s obvious that one should ignore it. 
       One feels that things are wretched and all too wrong;  however calm and cheerful and full of serenity by nature, one becomes utterly melancholy, feels that this can’t be different, and then, what is more practical than to say, if I don’t do something about it I’ll lose my energy and vitality, I’m going to refresh, renew myself in nature, I’m just going to tackle it very differently, and I’ll arrange it in such a way that in a few years’ time, say, I have altogether new, firm ground beneath my feet. I have no patience with the ‘so-called’ common sense (fake article, inexpressibly different from the real thing) that one is supposed to use, that one is said not to use if one departs from the ordinary or takes a risk. I say, I have no patience with it. For me, it’s precisely because my natural common sense, if I use it to reflect, leads me to such very different results from the narrow-minded worldly wisdom and cautious, half-hearted sincerity of some people, that I have no patience with it. Oh that procrastination, oh those hesitations, oh that failure to believe that good is good, that black is black and white is white. Dear brother — I can’t speak; now, at this moment, I’m glad that I can only express myself falteringly, chaotically and roughly. I’m glad that I can’t write to you coherently like Tersteeg and Pa — at this moment. I believe so strongly in your artistic ability that to me you’ll be an artist as soon as you pick up a brush or a piece of chalk and, clumsily or not clumsily, make something. 
   Before you can express yourself in your work, namely a straightforward, thinking manly soul — peaceable — good — before you can do that, a very great deal has to happen, but it will come. At first one doesn’t paint as one is, certainly not when one is good. But right away there’s a je ne sais quoi — I already see it now in your word pictures of bits of Paris &c., I would see it in your first sketches or studies too. When I think of Pa himself, then it seems to me that it’s to his contact with nature that Pa owes his goodness, and his mistake, to my mind, is to attach more value to other things than they’re basically worth. To me, Pa is someone who didn’t have any knowledge of the intimate lives of some great men when he should have had it. I mean that, in my view, Pa does not know, did not know nor ever will know what the soul of modern civilization is. What is it? The eternal, the very greatest simplicity and truth — Dupré, Daubigny, Corot, Millet, Israëls, Herkomer — not to mention Michelet, Hugo, Zola, Balzac, a host more from the more distant and more recent past. If prejudices, which Pa has carried with him throughout his life with an assiduousness worthy of a better cause, stand in his way — to me he’s a black ray. The only criticism I have of Pa is: why isn’t he a white ray? This is harsh criticism, so be it, I can’t help it. To you I say, look for white ray, white, do you hear! With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. I don’t say, far, very far be it for me to say that I have a white ray, but I’m not embarrassed to say that it exists, that white light — and I seek it, that alone do I consider simple.   Dear brother, they’re tricky matters to talk about, but anyway — don’t take it amiss of me if I can find no better words for what I mean, and look upon my endeavour to speak to you in confidence and calmly as brother to brother and friend to friend. Theo, I’ve often argued with Pa in the past because Pa said ‘it is thus’, and I said, Pa, you’re contradicting yourself, what you’re saying now is diametrically opposed to what at bottom you also vaguely feel yourself, even though you don’t want to feel it. Theo, for a long time I’ve completely and utterly refrained from arguing with Pa because I see that Pa has never thought about nor wants to think about certain very weighty things, and clings to a system by which he reasons, and simply does not reason (nor did nor ever will do) according to the bare facts. There are too many who do as he does for him not to find some support and assurance in the thought that everyone (that’s to say, first all the sedate, respectable clergymen) thinks like this about it. But he has no other assurance, and it’s based on a system and conventions, otherwise it would collapse as being groundless. Pa doesn’t wrestle with the naked truth. Well, all the same it seems to me that one is acting against oneself if one isn’t willing to think things through, it seems to me that one is acting against oneself if (in one’s youth, above all) one doesn’t say: listen here, for my part I don’t want to rely on a system, I want to set about it according to reason and conscience. I even pay less heed to my own father (although he’s not bad, although I say nothing about him), than to those in whom I see more truth. Well dear brother — I have a deep, deep, deep respect for Millet, Corot, Daubigny, Breton, Herkomer, Boughton, Jules Dupré &c. &c., Israëls, in short the painters — I’m far from confusing myself with them — I don’t consider myself their equal — no — but all the same I say, whether people think it conceited of me or anything else — all the same I say, you’ll show me the way and I’ll pay more heed to your example than to that of Father, master or anyone else. 
   To me, Pa and Tersteeg are something along the lines of Delaroche, Muller, Dubufe &c. — I may think it clever, I may say nothing about it, I may take it for what it is, I may have a certain respect for it, but that doesn’t alter the fact that I say, the least painter or human being who wrestles directly with the naked truths of nature is more than you. Anyway, old chap, neither Pa nor Tersteeg has given me anything but false peace for my conscience, and they haven’t made me free, nor even respected my desire for freedom and naked truth, and my feeling of ignorance and darkness. Well, left to my own devices I haven’t achieved the light and what I want, very well, so be it, but precisely since abandoning their systems outright, I yet have a degree of hope that my efforts won’t be in vain. And that I shall see the white ray before my eyes close. Whatever the inner struggle about not having found it yet, I’ve never regretted having said that I considered black ray black ray, and having abandoned that outright, save for not arguing about it, which, if I have argued about it, was a mistake. Well for my part, knowing what I know, I look at you and ask, What shall he do with it? Theo, when we had a bit of an argument in The Hague not long ago and you said to me — I’m increasingly drawn to Pa — then I said, old chap, it’s a tricky matter that, and you must follow your own conscience. But I’ve also tried to explain to you since that, for my part, I haven’t been able to find any peace in Pa’s way of thinking (and H.G.T.’s, which I find much the same), and was increasingly beginning to realize that there’s such a thing as black ray and white ray, and that I found their light black and a convention compared with the lightness of Millet and Corot, for instance. 
   Well, I’ve thought about it for 4 years longer than you, I’m 4 years older and calmer — with me, time and experience have led me to drop and abandon certain things. And I don’t want to influence you, but neither do I want to conceal myself from you or do anything other than speak out forthrightly. I come to the following conclusion. What Pa and Tersteeg held up to me as Duty was a Spectre of duty. They essentially said (not in so many words) ‘earn money and your life will become straight’. Millet says to me: put your life straight (at least try to do that first, and to wrestle with the naked truth) and EVEN earning money will sort itself out, and in that, too, you won’t be dishonest. I felt then, and much more so now, that (although they themselves believed they had honourable intentions, and I don’t suspect them of deceit but, as I said, take them for what they are — but at the same time leave them behind me), Pa and Tersteeg, and come to that C.M. and who knows who else, all the influences of the past, increasingly took me out of nature. Well, whatever one may say about Millet, at least he brought me back into nature more than anyone else could have done in my desperate state of mind. My youth has been austere and cold, and sterile under the influence of the black ray. And, brother, your youth too, in fact. Old chap — I don’t want to flatter you this time. Anyway, but I don’t want to blame anyone for it but myself. All the same, the black ray is unspeakably cruel — unspeakably. And at this moment I feel as many pent-up tears about many things as there are in a figure by Mantegna!9
   But brother, my very sorrow about so much proves to me that I’ve finished dealing with those systems. I’ve suffered from them, but at bottom I no longer belong on that side. And now, I say as brother to brother, as friend to friend, although our youth was austere and went against the grain, from now on let’s seek the gentle light, since I know no other name for it but the white ray or goodness. Not regarding ourselves as already having acquired it, of course, but searching for it, believing in it with collier’s faith. Be it as it may that more than once I’ve been short-tempered both with Pa and with Tersteeg &c. &c., don’t consider me as being influenced by hatred or malice towards them. I don’t envy them, in my view they’re not happy themselves, and at bottom I’m certainly not their enemy or their hater, nor do I regard them as my enemies either, even though I don’t look back on their influence with that much pleasure. But I don’t suspect them of malicious intentions. I think that they do follow their consciences, but that there are spectres there. And I do not see in Corot11 and Millet that there were spectres in their consciences. There I see that it was calmer and a serenity of a better calibre. Well, yet again, I’m still very far from that. However, every study, every effort towards painting, every new love of and wrestling with nature, happy or unhappy, brings me a faltering step closer. As to religion, I find less of that in Pa than in Uncle Jan, say, although many would obviously say the reverse. I find Pa the opposite of a man of faith. Anyway. Look here, starting to paint demands a certain collier’s faith because one can’t prove beforehand that it will succeed, and everyone would have grave doubts about it. But Theo, even though both you and I begin with as many pent-up tears as the figures by Mantegna or Giotto, at the same time we can have a silent hope through all our melancholy. In the early years of having things hard, it may be a sowing in tears, so be it, but we’ll hold them in, and a long, long way off we feel a silent hope of the harvest. Theo, For a while now, despite myself, I’ve let my thoughts go over one thing and another. Coming events cast their shadows before1 and We know not what a day may bring forth. Enough, for myself I have a presentiment that it will come to pass that you leave G&Cie because G&Cie will behave intolerably, recklessly, really badly, in short will do everything they can to make it impossible for you. At least that’s the story of the departure of the honest people who didn’t stay with G&Cie — no matter how attached they were to the house. Anyway. Wait and see what transpires, but don’t flatter yourself with much hope of reconciliation. As for me, Theo, the fact is that I can’t help but have hope for reconciliation in 1, cases in life, but my experience tells me that usually, even if there’s every reason to patch something up and much wrong in failing to patch it up — my experience tells me that it usually doesn’t happen. Well, old chap, if it should come to pass that you find yourself uprooted one fine morning before long, as if by a storm that has suddenly assumed amazing proportions, and increasingly start to feel that it had harmed you deeply, old chap, because something like that is terrible, and should yourself begin to doubt whether you still had the heart for trade — Then you be wise, then you be calm, then you be sensible and listen to what I tell you about the thorny path of painting, which initially involves all sorts of humiliation etc., but nonetheless leads to a solid victory and more definite peace than the trade can ever give. 
   You and I are brothers and, what’s more, friends, and if misfortune were to pull those ties a little bit tighter and bring us closer together, I’d see so very many good sides to it that for me it would put everything in a light different from misfortune. Theo, I’ve sometimes thought that the greatest poverty as an artist would be bearable, and productive too, if only one weren’t alone. You should realize, I’ve had that presentiment that you won’t stay with G&Cie constantly since I first wrote to you, coming events cast their shadows before, notwithstanding that I kept telling myself ‘that’s not going to happen, he’ll stay there’. And it has also become a fixed idea that you’ll feel so uprooted, so disoriented, so shattered, that at the thought of standing behind another counter again you’ll simply feel ‘I can’t’, ‘it wouldn’t be any good’, ‘I’m no use as a dealer any more’, ‘it was good at G&Cie, where I was since I was a boy, but now it’s all over’. There you have it, my presentiment tells me that au fond you’ll feel something like that. In that case, I see nothing reckless, nothing impractical, nothing foolish in that you and I should just feel our energy, ourselves, that our love for art might inspire in us a collier’s faith3 to say what others have said before and will say again after us. Namely that even if the situation is ominous, and even if we’re very poor &c. &c., yet we firmly concentrate on one single thing, on painting, naturally. I do have every sympathy for what you say, that for the sake of so many things you feel your heart pulled towards throwing yourself back into the business, not so much for your pleasure as for the welfare of many others. 
   Very well, but in my view those obligations to act thus would cease if the spirit of commerce were to fail you. And now, old chap, my presentiment, even despite myself, is that this spirit of yours will change and that your duty itself will bring you to the other thing. Dear brother, you don’t in the least have to abandon your endeavours in general to keep the whole family going. On the contrary, although I didn’t feel until now that I was entitled to put in a word here, the current state of affairs leads me to propose that in future you and I will talk about these things further. We give up nothing of what we have in hand, but everyone at home, Pa, Ma, Wil, Marie and we ourselves, too, have to understand something clearly. That we’ll have to work together and that, because of the G&Cie debacle, we’re facing a few years when we’ll have to: Stoop to conquer. In those few years we’ll have to see to it that at the end of it you and I together are earning as much as you now earn alone. And even if the intervening period is a bit of a rough ride for us all, we’ll just have to try to make up for it with a little warmth and love between us. But I see no good in your forcing yourself to take a new job against your inclination; on the contrary, I foresee that it would end in the whole thing coming to grief. But you must have collier’s faith — begin boldly with the fixed idea: painter. 
   I’m afraid, old chap, that if you get involved in new things, firstly you’ll waste time, secondly it will be a failure because the shock of being uprooted will be too much for you, thirdly you’ll lose more by it than you gain. If you still want to take this route and engage in Parisian or American or whatever business again, well then I would quietly let you go your own way, but I’ve stated my presentiments about this clearly enough overleaf. You decide for yourself whether I’ve got this wrong, to me it’s pretty obvious and clear that these consequences are highly likely. Well, old chap, I’m advising you to do something altogether new. Collier’s faith in art instead of saying (to me it’s whining) I can’t do anything, I’m not an artist, don’t attribute qualities to me that I don’t have, and all the rest of it. I say that is a delusion, and now, old chap, things are so serious and your future and mine are so mightily dependent on them that you mustn’t take it amiss of me if I say a bit bluntly that the right way, in the circumstances, is to persevere with painting, with collier’s faith. They’ll have to understand one thing at home — that, come what may, you and I will always have the same goal in view as we have now, namely to keep things going, not only ourselves but things in general. But that one path has been closed to us and we have to create a new one for ourselves, and for that we need them to keep quiet about it and not upset us, and on the contrary help us with it should that be needed. Our plan must be respected at home and not interfered with. There you have it, old chap, I can say no different. It unsettles me that I may not flatter you by saying that other things will work out well. It was perhaps, or rather certainly, a mistake on our part not to begin sooner, but it’s an understandable mistake given our upbringing and the influences we were subject to, and now it’s simply a reason to set to work now with a steadfastness and resolve that I doubt we’d have had when we were younger. So it seems to me that all our forces must be concentrated in the direction of painting, with the greatest determination and as being the raft to get ashore after the shipwreck. Undertaking it in all cheerfulness. Adieu, old chap, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. Theo, You once wrote to me about a certain difference in our respective physiognomies. Very well. And your conclusion was that I would be more of a thinker. What shall I say about that? I am indeed aware of a mode of thinking within me, but nevertheless I don’t feel that my thinking is really organized within me. I feel that I’m a little different from being a real thinker. When I think about you I see action, very characteristic, so be it, but also so decidedly not in isolation, and on the contrary accompanied by so much feeling and indeed thinking too, that my conclusion is that there’s more similarity than difference between you and me. I don’t say there’s no difference — but having got to know you better of late it seems to me that the difference is less than I thought for a while in years past. When I look at our temperament and type of physiognomy, I find rapports and very pronounced similarities between, for example, the Puritans and ourselves. I.e. the folk from around Cromwell’s time, a small band of men and women who sailed out to America in the Mayflower, away from an old world, and settled there, determined to live in simplicity. Times change — they cut down forests — we’d turn to painting. I know that the initiative taken by a small band, known to history as the Pilgrim Fathers, however small in itself, had great consequences. And for ourselves I’d think in the first place that we shouldn’t really philosophize about great consequences, should seek nothing but a path for ourselves so that we can travel through life as straight as possible. Premeditating consequences is not our way, neither yours nor mine. When I speak of the Pilgrim Fathers it’s for reasons of physiognomy, to point out to you that certain red-headed folk with square foreheads aren’t thinkers alone nor men of action alone, but usually have both elements combined. I recognize a figure of one of those Puritans in Boughton’s paintings, and if I didn’t know better I would believe that you had posed for it. The physiognomy above all, exact, exact — a little silhouette on a rock against a background of sea and mist — if need be I can also show you myself, i.e. that variation of the same physiognomy, but my profile is less characteristic.
   Pa sometimes mulled over the story of Jacob and Esau4 with regard to you and me — not entirely mistakenly — although happily there’s less enmity, to mention just one difference, and in the Bible itself there are examples aplenty of better relations between brothers than existed between the aforementioned venerable patriarchs. I sometimes thought myself about being a thinker, but I saw more and more that I wasn’t cut out for it, and because now, unfortunately, the prejudice that someone who has a need to think things through is not practical and only belongs among the dreamers, because this prejudice is very respected in society, I usually got into trouble precisely by not keeping things to myself enough. But since then, the very history of the Puritans and the history of Cromwell, as Carlyle conceived it, for instance, made me see how much thinking and acting don’t rule one another out, and the sharp distinctions between thinking and acting that it’s customary to assume nowadays, as if one rules out the other, don’t actually exist. As to doubting oneself, whether one is an artist or not — that entire question is too much of an abstraction. I say that I have nothing against thinking about it, though, provided I may also draw and paint. And — my plan for my life is to make paintings and drawings, as many and as well as I can — then, when my life is over, I hope to depart in no other way than looking back with love and wistfulness and thinking, oh paintings that I would have made! But this doesn’t, if you please, rule out making what is possible. Do you have anything against this, either for me or for you? I wish that painting became such a fixed idea with you that the question, am I an artist or am I not an artist, was somewhat consigned to the realm of abstractions, and that more practical questions concerning putting a figure or a landscape together would come to the fore, being more enjoyable. Theo, I declare to you that I would rather think about how arms, legs, head attach to a torso than whether or not I myself am more of an artist or less. 
   I think that you would rather think about a sky with grey clouds and their shining edges over a muddy piece of land than ponder on the question of yourself.  Well, I do know it though, sometimes the mind is full of it, it can’t be helped. Look here, brother, even if our mind is sometimes occupied by the question is there a God or does He not exist, this is no reason for us deliberately to commit a godless act, is it? Likewise the question, artistically, am I an artist or not? shouldn’t lead us not to draw or not to paint. Many things can’t be defined, and in my view wasting too much time on them is wrong. Now, if the work doesn’t go well or one runs up against a lack of knowledge, one becomes bogged down in such thoughts and insoluble questions. And feeling troubled by this, the best thing to do is to overcome the cause of the distraction by getting a fresh view of the practical side of the work. Now for my part, seeing both in you and in me something of that puritanical character that unites thinking and doing so much and is so far from wanting to be only a thinker or only a machine, that has a need both for principles of simplicity and for motivated work at the same time, I do not admit a separation or divergence, much less that you and I should be opposites. In my view it would be an error of judgement if you were to continue in business in Paris. So the conclusion, two brothers, painters. Whether it’s in your nature? You could occupy yourself struggling hard and fruitlessly against nature precisely by doubting whether you can, and thus hamper your own liberation. Sadly, I know that all too well in my own case. After all — even despite our being against ourselves, I’m starting to realize more and more, man proposes, God disposes.
   There’s an infinitely powerful force over our doing right and our doing wrong. Likewise your circumstances — be sensible — perhaps even so sensible that you become a painter for good and all. It would basically reassure me so much if I saw you pick up the brush that I’d reckon the disaster and shipwreck of the moment as being of less importance than the future certainty of heading in a direction you won’t regret. But I do wish you would find immediate tranquillity for your heart in the matter of women. If that were possible, you would be even stronger, since being loved gives one certain wings, certain surprising courage and energy. Then one is more a whole person than otherwise. And the sooner one is that the better. In any case, I reckon it among the possibilities that you yourself will come to realize that your path is painting, and then, my dear brother, Puritan without knowing it, it could well be that your time in Paris is coming to an end, an old world closing itself off from you in a less than generous manner — however a new world opening up to you — appearing inhospitable and rough, together with all that, a certain hope and high courage in the heart, one feels the something on High9 above the barren shore, and so one turns one’s hand to the plough10 — asking no questions. Well, think about it, more or less, for a long or short while. But it wouldn’t help if you were to say, Vincent, be quiet about it, for I’d reply, Theo, perhaps it won’t be quiet in yourself. It is more difficult to contain Than the source of great rivers. Theo, I’ve heard from the poor woman13 a few times since. She seems to be carrying on working, doing washing for people, serving as a temporary help, in short doing her best. Writes almost indecipherably and incoherently. Seems to regret some things from the past. Children healthy and well. My pity and affection for her are certainly not dead, and I do hope that we’ll retain a bond of affection, although I don’t believe that living together again would be desirable or possible. Pity may not be love, but that doesn’t alter the fact that it can go deep. Well brother, to change the subject, it’s snowing here today in the form of colossal hailstones. I say it’s snowing because of the effect. I’m keeping silent about the beauty of it here, because I would have TOO MUCH to tell you about it. As to work, I’m almost overbrimming because of the idea that you might start on it, which has a surprising hold on me. I wish it could be decided, precisely so that we could make definite plans for working together. Drenthe is so beautiful, it absorbs and fulfils me so utterly that, if I couldn’t stay here forever I would rather not have seen it at all. It’s inexpressibly beautiful. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. Dear brother, Thanks for your letter, although as you indeed say yourself, it’s short. I know that nowadays various people consider everything that is an exchange of ideas, everything that isn’t specific things or facts, to be superfluous and even nonsense in a letter, and so arrive at a very concise form, certainly; at the same time though, a rather unsatisfactory — disappointing — manner of writing. In short, brother, I do wish that you had written less drily about it (but could have been due to pressure of work). As to your idea of letting some time go by, then examining the question again from all sides, I think it’s wise and not at all wrong in itself. But then you add something else to that suggestion to which I’ll give you a wholly forthright answer. You say... just you think again about whether there isn’t also a lot to be said for staying at G&Cie. Well, brother, I’ve already thought more about that question, both in the past and now, than I’ve written to you until now, and since you now ask me to consider the issue for once from the for side, I’ll tell you in all honesty what I think about it. You should know, then, that I find it increasingly doubtful whether what G&Cie have on the for side is really fundamentally any good to us, I mean to you, to the people at home and to me — I’m not thinking solely of the financial benefit but also of other doubtful benefits, such as direct or indirect relationships with influential people &c., in short, all things considered, I put a question mark after for. 
   Make no mistake — there has perhaps — no certainly — been a crisis both at home and in my own life when I really believe that all our lives were, as it were, literally saved by you — ruin averted by the support and protection that we got from you — for me, in particular, it was critical. If I’ve now reached a point where, when I stand before an object or a figure, I feel within myself clearly, distinctly, without hesitation the power to draw it — not render it perfectly but definitely in its general structure and proportion, very well, it was essential, absolutely essential to reach this point, and if I’ve reached it, it has been chiefly because your support was a hedge or fence between a hostile world and me, and I had the peace I needed to think almost exclusively about drawing, and my thoughts weren’t snuffed out by fatally overwhelming material worries. And — although I don’t know the ins and outs of it — I believe they’re also greatly obliged to you at home. And indirectly to G&Cie, too — so — I want to acknowledge the for side to the full — so far, but from now on? You see, that’s where the question mark arises, after good, after for. If your support was indispensable until today, I believe that in future I, at least, must work on bringing about a change in this. The germinating seed mustn’t be exposed to a freezing wind — that’s how it was with me at the start; if you hadn’t been there, Uncle Vincent’s words, ‘good for nothing’, HGT’s words and their accompanying turning of the back and cold shoulder, 
   would I fear have been as fatal to me at a critical moment as a cold wind to the germinating wheat. But once the winter wheat has put down roots it’s a little stronger, and it manages to get through the winter one way or another, at least must get through the winter. And now, brother, I’d consider it weak on my part if I said to you, the money from you must continue, thus contributing to your resigning yourself to staying at G&Cie. On the contrary, I say — Theo, if you stay at G&Cie, if this is settled, I’m so decidedly against it, I so decidedly warn you: the art trade will betray you in the end — that I want no part in forcing you to make such a decision by needing help myself. And although I hope that we’d remain just as good friends and always feel that we’re brothers, I repeat, it is my intention to refuse your financial help as soon as you bind yourself to G&Cie permanently, because I would regard such a decision as being one that you’d regret in the end, and put you in a position where you might say: I wish I’d never got into it, and then you would also think: why did my brother, my parents bring me to this at the time. I do not want any part of that, leading you to make that decision. Consequently you now know in all frankness what, au fond, I think about ‘what G&Cie has for(?) it’. What would I do then? Well, for instance try to get a job on an illustrated magazine, or in short do whatever turned up, no matter what, for which perhaps you yourself might know of an opening or could tell me something about — about Moniteur Universel, for instance — which I don’t regard as the most desirable, by the way. But left entirely to myself I might perhaps take a chance in Paris or in London or The Hague, in short at a printer’s or illustrated magazine in a city, at the same time trying to make drawings or paintings and to sell them of course, and after that try to consider Drenthe again. 
   In that case, though, I would expressly want to put myself in a tremendous predicament so as to force me to be productive, and myself request that the present payment should stop. But brother, this in the event that you stay at G&Cie, and in the other possible case, that you yourself decide on painting, we’d automatically have the pressure of a tremendous compulsion behind us, and in those circumstances would have to strengthen each other by loyal comradeship. But although I feel and will always feel a gratitude for the support, for which all words and expressions seem to me too feeble, my intention for the future is fixed; if you stay at G&Cie it’s precisely what will force me to take the decision stated above, although our friendship will always endure in any event, unless you should object to having anything to do with me. If — and I don’t now consider this entirely impossible either — it’s not so much the circumstances as your own soul that leads you to painting, very well, then it seems to me that it goes without saying that we’ll join forces wholly for one and the same goal and endeavour. But as far as my coming round to the idea of thinking it good(?) for you to continue at G&Cie, considering the for(?) of the matter — you see the nature of my considerations. In short, when I wrote as I wrote in certain letters, it’s too definite for me to say later, no, now I think it’s a good idea after all. I have my own experiences of G&Cie in the past, a look at that, a look at the present, and a look into the future bring me to a Beware!4 And for my part I regard Paris as enervating, and I would see no benefit in being there for good, either for me or for you. Perhaps I might have to be there for a while myself, have to see about making certain contacts (from which I was precluded too much in The Hague), but I’ll stay in the country as much as possible, and I regard anything that isn’t painting or drawing as an irrelevance to me. Adieu, old chap, in any event give it time, and accept a hearty handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Well, brother, you know I’d promised Wisselingh that I’d show him a few studies from Drenthe before the winter. I’m sending 6 studies off today;6 would you be so good as to show them to him when you get a chance, by way of a small sign of life? Though of course I don’t think that they’d be suitable for selling. There’s no more painting out of doors now, because it’s far too cold these days. But what a relief it would be for me if I could settle in these parts permanently. The rent is very low; if one only had company it would be such a wonderful thing to rent a peasant cottage and to arrange everything solidly and less precariously than in an inn. Anyway, as I said, let us possess our souls in patience;7 let things take their course. Taking a house alone is so very melancholy and cold. There has to be a bit of life in the place to keep things going along and prevent stagnation. But Theo, how inexpressibly beautiful it is here. You can’t see that yet in my studies at all. I still have to learn a lot more to express how it really is here, and it’s also a question of time. One thing I tell you, that this countryside has the effect on me of bringing me peace, faith, courage, and I believe you also need this influence yourself — it would be the very, very best thing for you — let you find yourself, your soul again, but more thoroughly and fully than in the time of drawing mills. But I’m afraid you regard what I say as a trick of my imagination, my words as up in the air and without foundation.  And it’s therefore extremely difficult, I admit it, to know what one should do. Money plays a shameless role in society, and your feeling about this is a feeling that I also have on the subject. Only there’s such a lively hope in me that painting really would unleash our true capacity for work and still keep us going, even though the first few years would inevitably be extremely difficult. If I die then I die, is the only thing one can say in that situation. 
   About what I say, that if you definitely stay at G&Cie I’ll consider myself obliged to refuse your support, don’t think that I have high opinions of my present work. No, I don’t, for example, attach any market value to it, but my idea is that I want to work without more protection than other people have, and so I’ll throw myself into it not because I’m already there now, but because I believe ‘I will mature in the storm’. You will ask what I mean by saying ‘staying at G&Cie permanently or decidedly’? Look — winter is almost upon us, and here I am in the middle of the heath, and what else can I try to do right now besides work? But suppose that come the spring, in the month of March for instance, you’re still at G&Cie and on good terms, without the prospect of leaving. Then I would already call this staying permanently or definitely, and then seek to take another direction, or rather force myself into it due to an enormous predicament. Fortune favours the bold, says the proverb, although something could perhaps be said against that, but anyway I believe that it’s definitely based in fact, as is the opposite, that in the end a sort of fatal doom rests on moral weakness or lack of courage. Consequently, my plan is always to try to do too much rather than too little; if one bumps one’s head doing too much, well then, one bumps it. Enough, I don’t want my needs to be pressing reasons for you to stay; if you want to stay, stay; but not for my sake, as I’ll only too decidedly not think it your best way. Once more, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Don’t take what I say amiss, will you; as if I had something personal against you should you stay. Because even then I’ll consider you good the way you are. In that case it will be absolutely nothing other than a question that I don’t want there to be any possibility that it could reasonably be said that I would ever agree that you should have done something like stay in a profession against your will with my knowledge, more or less for my sake; I certainly don’t want anyone’s pocket to suffer for my boldness. My dear Theo, May I draw your attention to the fact that the post of Monday, 26 Nov. has just been without having brought your letter. That because it still has to go to Hoogeveen and back, we’ve now reached a point where it’s almost the same as if I hadn’t had the usual once, for supposing the next post brings the letter, I won’t receive the money before late evening on 28 Nov. or the morning of 29 Nov. Consequently this is actually a deficit, because your next letter, namely the one that I’d otherwise have thought I could expect around 1 Dec., will probably not come. Because since I’ve been here in Nieuw-Amsterdam the letters have come later and later each time. If I’d received a word of warning in accordance with our agreement, it wouldn’t have engendered in me this feeling that, little by little, I cannot help getting slightly. Namely that some ambiguity is beginning to creep into our relationship, which began by being sincere, by mutually understanding and respecting each other. Well, that the above-mentioned is a disappointment to me and very palpably distresses me, even aside from thoughts that I can’t exactly help welling up in me, still isn’t the most pressing thing on my mind today. It is, rather, a vague disquiet about you, although — perhaps precisely because — I heard from home only yesterday that they’d had a good letter from you. From this, then, I would infer that that particular crisis has been suppressed, averted, stopped; well, whatever you want to call it. And that 
   this, then, would be a confirmation of your words to me, ‘I think that things will stay as they are for the time being’. As to which, however, I already hinted that it only half pleased me, or rather that it worried me much more than reassured me about your future. I just hope that you will understand and not misunderstand me. At this moment I don’t suspect you of insincerity — please hold on to that as my starting-point. Because I thus believe in you as an honest man, I reckon you to be relatively safe up till now despite everything, even in the event of a catastrophe. But now comes the point where I fear you run a risk — are vulnerable. Suppose everything that threatened is averted, suppose everything has calmed down, I’d like to remind you of the saying: don’t fear the storm but dread the calm, treacherous, enchanted ground. Suppose you are slowly and imperceptibly carried along by a silent current into other waters rather than forging straight ahead. Suppose that what I’ll call — forgive the expression — poison in the Paris atmosphere — the Jesuitism of its miasma — seeps insidiously into your pores — imperceptible to you — but nevertheless you’ll begin to notice its effect yourself in a few years — I’ve strayed from the course — I’m too insincere, have become too little myself, and I’ve yielded too much to just seeking prosperity. 
   Brother — when you recently wrote ‘I believe I’m on to a new idea in the financial sphere’5 — I just thought: that’s bad enough. I wouldn’t have thought that if, say, you’d been able to write, I’m on to something in the sphere of printing, for instance, or — I’ve discovered some bold new artists with whom I’ll be able to do something — in short, I’d have found anything you like in the field of work or art capital, but — financial sphere — I’m sorry — it’s too much up in the air for me. Well, old chap, do you take it amiss that I’m not completely at ease about you? And secondly, do you believe that I’m not confusing the things that concern you with my own affairs, as being in a sense dependent on yours? Although my affairs are dependent on yours, that isn’t what’s worrying me now — my worry is purely about you — about you as a human being — as a man — as an upright, honest man. As to my question, will you not suffer harm and go downhill — as a human being? If I bring myself to ask this question it’s because Paris is Paris. I don’t say that I know that I would always have that strength of mind, so I don’t speak of myself but of a person from the distant past. He, so they say, when he felt that he was on enchanted ground in an enchanted atmosphere, where he felt he was being enervated, resolutely ventured from the island in question, on a beam or raft, into the open sea, thinking: the sea isn’t as dangerous as this and that. And in my view that man was very wise. You must permit me not to define this and that, but simply say of it, there are things that one must be aware can enchant someone insidiously and can in a short time turn one precisely the opposite way from where one was going as long as one was honest.
   My words may be gloomy — very well. As to myself, I have moments when all my own prospects seem very dark to me — yet, as I already wrote to you, I don’t believe that my fate is dependent on what may appear to be against it. Even if all manner of things are against me, there can be something more powerful than what I see threatening. I used the word fatality7 — for want of a better word — he who doesn’t have to fall yet, won’t fall. So as for myself, I submit to it and act as if nothing was the matter. As for you, as I said, as long as I believe in your sincerity, and I don’t yet believe the opposite, I also believe that, despite good fortune or ill fortune, you are safe, albeit only in that particular reality that hovers above the appearance of things. But I had to smile about what they wrote from home with a single, general word about a ‘good’ letter — and I know nothing more about it than this, and that it seemed that things had taken a more favourable turn. I thought: good — if you people say that you’re at ease, then let you people be at ease. I didn’t think any more of it than that, though.  If the single sentence about you in the letter in question ended with: ‘but in the coming year they8 expect that important events will take place and we just hope that he (you, in other words) won’t suffer any harm from them,’ it occurred to me that the events in question won’t add to or detract from you much as a man, but the question will rather be: what shall he do with it? — with his character, aptitude — soul in a word — question in my view undecided thus far — very certainly dependent to a highly significant degree on one’s own reflections and own will. 
   But know this one thing, brother — that whatever choice you may make or whatever decision you take or don’t take — that whether you’d become better or worse in my view — and also whether or not more or less direct rapport with regard to money or business will remain between us, I will not conceive of this as our turning our backs on each other. Difference of perspective, difference of outlook on life, difference even of principles (supposing they might become apparent to us later — now they have not yet become so apparent) are still no reason for me to ignore what is a fact, namely that we’re brothers and have many points in common. I stress this here above all for our mutual reassurance, I hope. You have your freedom, I have my freedom, to act as appears the most reasonable to us, haven’t we? And provided one always keeps this in the forefront — that one doesn’t blame the other or is hostile or becomes malicious, or makes the other’s life difficult on account of some difference of opinion — although there may be a time of greater coolness, at least things will, thank God, remain free of fantasy or intrigue. Which sadly isn’t always the case with everyone.  It’s the same as regards the money, which I started by writing about, what I mean FIRST AND FOREMOST is: let there never be any dispute about it between us, and know that of course I don’t hold it against you in the slightest if you don’t have it, not even though I’m sometimes hugely in difficulties because of it. 
   And as regards the capital already invested in it by you and by me, for after all I’m investing my work, in fact every fibre of my being — as regards all this — I still have a real hope of its working out in the future — although, although — perhaps not only I, but you too for your part have been mistaken about a few things — which, however, aren’t yet fatal or irreparable in any event — and which I don’t even want to touch on now. Don’t regard this letter or previous letters as mistrustful, as suspicious, as insulting, regard them as a warning about some Parisian things that I ask you to consider, not as if I were infallible, not as if I’d demand that you agree with me — but because I believe I detect certain symptoms that seem to me to be of a puzzling and ominous nature. And yes — now it must be said — I don’t even ask for an answer — in fact, I ask you not even to consider it as a question but as a statement, in order to make it absolutely clear to you that I have another concern within the general concern. In short, the crux of a great deal is — this woman of yours, is she good? Is she sincere? Is she simple, does she stand on the ordinary ground, or is there a little weed of a rather dangerous desire for what I’ll call greatness running through her wheat? I was thinking of Lady Macbeth. Macbeth was an honest man, but — — — — but — was enchanted, and when he and she woke up, was faced with more and worse evil than had been their intention. And Macbeth fell — but with a great fall. Reassure me if you can — as for disasters, that’s not what I’m so terribly afraid of — on the whole one shouldn’t fear anything other than becoming worse. Now you know the chief thing I sometimes worry about when I think of you. 
   There you are, I’m being harsh now because I wanted to say straight out that I would be so very thankful if I was reassured on that point. I repeat, I don’t in the least ask for particulars. But the fact remains that there are men who fall in that way. And there are men who turn back in time. If a woman is simply good, well it’s a blessing — but there’s a danger, when the woman wants to shine in the eyes of the world, that she might make a man base. Mentioning this sickness isn’t the same as saying that this is your case, is it? — and on the contrary I ask, say one word and I’ll be completely reassured and not ask any more. The woman I was with, who is she? — a whore, already marked by the pox, already withered and aged, already mother of 2 children — oh — she isn’t a good woman, all right — but here, misfortune has reached such a height that she could not have been a Lady Macbeth any more, and so as to temptation, if in former years she has perhaps been deeply wicked, her very misfortune has so curtailed the power to do harm (assuming it had existed, and I’m not at all sure of that) that there could hardly have been any question of temptation now. And so I don’t say what I say to you because I wanted to strike a rapport; precisely because there’s so much difference, there would be no chance of the above-mentioned Lady Macbeth effect in my relations with my woman, but you’re faced with a personality that has the power of charm, and that charm could be fatal if it were directed towards worldly ambition. As for me, precisely because the woman I was with is someone who is unhappy through and through and so heavily burdened with a bad name, 2 children, poverty &c., that, even if 
   I thought she wasn’t good, I wouldn’t want to break all the ties, and I wouldn’t let anyone stop me from seeing her, speaking to her, writing to her, sending her some money if I should have any. Let people think something of it or talk about it, fine, I’ve long since ceased even to take it amiss. But look here; in your case charm could perhaps have the effect of numbing very important heartstrings, those governing the sense of right and wrong. I don’t say that this is so, I repeat once more, I don’t even ask: is it so? I repeat once more, I mention it just as a hint that I hint, but having given it because there could be a sort of possibility, I’ll leave it at that and not pursue it any further in my thoughts. And also believe you’ll excuse this concern of mine and not take it amiss should it have no raison d’être, which is what I hope we’re dealing with here. Have you received my studies? I’ve since made a large painted study and a large drawing of a drawbridge, and even a second painted one of it, with a different effect. I hope to use them as soon as we get snow to tackle the snow effect more accurately, that is keeping the same lines and way it fits together as I’ve found now. Well, I hope to hear from you soon — I think very little about what effect one event or another that isn’t yet exactly on the horizon will have on you, but I do, as you see, think about you as a human being, about the ‘what shall he do with it’ — with your capacity for work and personal energy too. With a handshake, believe me Ever yours, Vincent. Heard yesterday that Furnée passed his final exam and now has his hands free again to get on with painting again. Although it may not be my first preoccupation, I’m nonetheless far from indifferent as to what’s happening in this question of almost 10 days’ difference in receipt of the money. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and the enclosure. Your letter explains your silence to me. You thought that ‘feeling that I was flush’, I was giving you an ‘ultimatum’ — in the way — similar — that the nihilists, say, might send them to the Tsar. Well, fortunately both for you and for me, there’s no question here of anything of the kind or similar. However, I do understand your interpretation now that I know what it is, but I had to know. For a start I meant something different — it was simply: ‘I wouldn’t want to flourish if you had to wither in consequence; I wouldn’t want to develop the artistic in me if you had to suppress the artistic in you for my sake. I wouldn’t approve if you were to suppress the artistic in you for anyone’s sake, even for the sake of father, mother, sister, brother or wife’. There you have my meaning — perhaps expressed nervously and in the wrong words — most decidedly there was no more nor anything else behind it than that. You understand it well enough now, don’t you? As to what I wrote in my last letter, it arose out of your silence, an absolute mystery to me, absolutely inexplicable to me until I knew what the matter was. I already had an answer as far as Marie is concerned before I ever received your letter, simply because I remembered what you wrote to me in the past about your meeting with her and thought, that has to be all right, that can’t be what’s wrong. So even my letter on the subject was meant like this: brother, you seem to abandon me without warning; if you did this on purpose it would be treachery in my view, but I CAN not think that, so ‘explain it to me’ — no more nor less than this was behind that, and as to what I said about Lady Macbeth, you’ve interpreted it correctly, as a hint in general that was not even a question but only to make you feel: either it has to be like this or it is a misunderstanding. Be aware of this, though, brother, that I’m absolutely cut off from the outside world — except for you — so that for me it was enough to make me crazy when your letter didn’t come at a moment when, far from being ‘flush’, I was in dire straits — although I didn’t mention that — because I reckon that I’m somewhat above the cares that peck at my vitals, regarding this torture as understandable, so be it, although not as deserved. As to ‘I wouldn’t want to flourish if someone else had to wither in consequence’, I hope that I would say this — which lay in what you conceived to be an ultimatum —whether I was ‘flush’ OR in ‘agony’. It seems to me that the conclusion that I spoke as if I was ‘flush’ was rather shallow or hasty on your part — although it must have been in the way I expressed it, for it was certainly not what I felt. 
   I just want to tell you that since I’ve been here I’ve had to see to it that my equipment was organized, that I had paint, that I went to see this and that, that I paid for my lodgings, that I sent the woman something, that I paid off some debts. All this keeping me very hard up all the time — to put it mildly. Add to this that singular torture... loneliness, and you really will no longer be able to think that there’s any possibility of my feeling ‘flush’ for the time being — or that I felt it then. I say loneliness and not even in peace3 — but that loneliness which a painter in an isolated region encounters when every Tom, Dick and Harry takes him to be a madman — a murderer — a vagabond &c. &c. Granted it may be a petty vexation, but a vexation it is. Being a stranger, doubly strange and unpleasant — however stimulating and beautiful the countryside may be. But I see in this only a bad time that one has to get through. Something, though, which one can do very little about oneself — that is, about the attitude of the people whom one would so much like to have as models and can’t get. With hindsight, I see clearly enough how you and I came to misunderstand each other. There was a moment when you were very melancholy, and you wrote me the following: the gentlemen are making it almost impossible for me, and I actually believe that they would rather dismiss me than that I should resign (the underlined precisely my case at the time). And you said, ‘sometimes I think I should just disappear’ — and you said — there were things about the idea of painting to which you were at least not averse.  Very well — then I candidly told you all my thoughts about the possibility of your becoming a painter, I said you can do it provided you want to, and I believe in you as an artist, from the moment you pick up a brush, even if no one else does. What I said about that, I’ll say to you in the future should a misfortune — a calamity — strike you — what is now stopping you from ‘a complete renewal’ is indeed a misfortune. If a calamity were to strike you, I believe that you as a person would become a greater person as a result, with — with — with — an eternally painful wound at the same time. I would expect of you that it would raise you up, not ‘drag you down’, that wound which can only be caused by a calamity. 
   But your later letters differ so much in tone and so much in content that I now say: if your rigged ship is sound, very well, then stay on it. However I’ll always maintain what I said should a calamity put you in a different position in relation to society. Were that ever to happen, I say in that regard: let it be a sign for you to make a complete change of profession, rather than starting all over again doing the same thing. But as long as you have your rigged ship, I don’t say that I advise you to put to sea in a fishing-boat. Although I wouldn’t wish for G&Cie’s rigged ship back, as far as I personally am concerned. At the time I thought, for God’s sake, calamity — do your worst! At first I didn’t know what to think about the change in the tone of your letters. Now, looking back, I think as regards your somewhat melancholy but for me so touching letter, written at a time when G&Cie were being terribly nasty to you (a moment COMPARABLE to what I experienced myself) — now in hindsight I think, I say, that you took a different view of that moment when I said to the G&Cie gentlemen ‘if you force me to go, I won’t refuse to go’, and that things really have calmed down, perhaps for good — and with your consent — so be it — I won’t object. Well, I do not take it amiss of you — because I believe that in such a case certain conditions that really are acceptable can be laid down — and I think that you would not have accepted them were there to have been anything dishonest in accepting them. But why I said something like, ‘if you stay then I’ll refuse your financial support,’6 was because you had said ‘let me stay where I am because I have to take care of Pa, Ma, Wil and Marie’, and (although you didn’t mention me) me as well. Tact on your part not to mention me, to which I had to respond with tact on my part — I don’t want that — you sacrificing yourself in so far as you would stay there against your will for the sake of others. There you have what you interpreted as giving you an ultimatum. If you stay there because ‘you have a renewed pleasure in it’ — it’s all to the good as far as I’m concerned, and I congratulate you on your newly rigged ship, although for myself I have no desire to go back. 
   What you write about Serret interests me greatly. A man like that who eventually produces something heart-rending as blossom from a hard and difficult life is a phenomenon like the blackthorn, or better yet a gnarled old apple tree which suddenly bears blossoms that are among the tenderest and most ‘pure’ things under the sun. When a rough man blossoms — it’s indeed a beautiful sight — but HE has had to endure an awful lot of cold winters before then — more than even the later sympathizers know. The artist’s life and WHAT an artist is, that’s very curious — how deep is it — infinitely deep. Because of your silence, inexplicable to me, and because I also associated it with the possible resumption of difficulties with the gentlemen, because for my part I was intolerably hard-pressed as a result of the mistrust of the people in the lodgings, I dropped Pa a line that, not having heard from you, I didn’t know what to think and asked Pa for a loan. I added that I was uneasy both about you and about myself, particularly when I thought about the future, and I wished that both you and I had become painters when we were boys, and actually saw no reason why we two brothers shouldn’t be painters even now if G&Cie were not to remain what it once was to you. Should Pa ever write to you about it, you know the reason for it, but I’ll write to Pa myself (I haven’t had a reply from Pa yet) that your last letter has made it plain to me that for the time being G&Cie remains G&Cie. I add this to you, not to Pa: since G&Cie exercises an influence on our family, strangely compounded of good and evil; good, certainly, in any event because it prevents much stagnation (evil not being in question for the moment). That my heart perhaps has and feels bitterness of its own is something that in my view you both understand and consequently forgive me out of yourself. Ultimatum — YOU speak of it — NOT I (at least my intention was something very different) — if you want to interpret it that way — then it’s all right with me, but I shall not be the first — nor have I been — for the moment your interpretation runs very far ahead of my intention. I would perhaps not contradict you any more than I did G&Cie in the past, if you wanted to carry it through. Then I would say again, you said ultimatum first, NOT I. If you want to interpret it thus, then I don’t oppose this interpretation. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Brother — after your last letter all my worst vague anxieties have been quieted — I mean that I have complete confidence in you as a man and in Marie. But I simply think that you’ll run into certain financial difficulties because of the course of events. I advise you, if you can economize on something, then economize, that’s to say if you can put something by, then put something by. I myself have nothing at the moment — but I’ll see if I can arouse some interest in certain plans of mine — or if no one wants to come back to Drenthe with me later on, then at least see if I can’t find some credit for myself so that I can settle there. I’m not flush, I have nothing. I’ve seen how shaky your finances have been for a long time — you had too much on your shoulders — you think now that the future will put it right — I think you’ll find the future hostile in Paris. Again, if I’m wrong you can all laugh at me and I’ll laugh about it myself. If it’s just my nerves deluding me, well then, it’s my nerves — but I fear you all too effectively have a fatality against you.
   I’ll be able to write to you more calmly from home. There’s certainly a working environment for me in Drenthe, but preferably I’ll have to be able to look at things rather differently from the outset and have a little more certainty in my finances. I have to watch the cents — on a small scale; at present, for instance, obviously I concede that this is the first time you have definitely skipped — the difference of some 25 guilders is something that may stump me again for 6 weeks perhaps. I can readily believe that you can’t imagine this — you cannot know what sort of difficulties over and over again, each very small in itself, make something possible or impossible. Don’t take it amiss of me, but believe me that I have to try to take some steps in order to accomplish what I want. Last week, for instance, I got a note from my former landlord, who gave me the impression that he could seize my things that I left behind (including all my studies, prints, books — that I could hardly do without) if I didn’t send him 10 guilders that I’ve promised him as payment for the use of an attic room for my belongings, and some rent that it was doubtful he was entitled to claim, but I agreed on condition of an arrangement to store my things. I have to pay for other things by the New Year, I still have to pay Rappard, and I economized on everything I could. In short, it’s not the same as feeling flush. Things can’t remain as they are at present. I have to find a way out. I don’t say that you’re to blame, of course, but even last year I couldn’t have economized more than I did. And the harder I work, the more hard-pressed I become. We’re now at a point where I say: at present I cannot go on. My dear Theo, You’ll have been rather surprised that I dropped you a line that I would go home sometime, and am now writing to you from here.  But first I must thank you for your letter of 1 December, which I’ve just received here in Nuenen. The last 3 weeks I was actually rather unwell — was troubled by various things that arose out of having caught a cold, and nerves as well. One must try to break something like that, and I felt that I would get worse if I didn’t have a change.  Well, I decided to go home for various reasons — something I was actually very loath to do. My journey began with a walk of more than 6 hours — mostly across the heath — to Hoogeveen. On a stormy afternoon with rain, with snow. This walk cheered me up no end, or rather my feelings were so in sympathy with nature that it calmed me down more than anything else. I thought that being at home again might give me a more accurate insight into the question of what I should do. Drenthe is superb, but staying there depends on many things — depends on whether one has the money for it, depends on whether one can endure the loneliness. Pa would consider that question settled, I believe, with a conclusion that one would reach in a conversation, but for my part I’m in no hurry to make a decision about it, and I’ll have to see what I think about it, for instance, when I’ve been here for a week or so. However, for the time being I’m in the dark as to what I should do in this respect. 
   I see more and more that when one thinks or speaks about something, one by no means arrives at a satisfactory conclusion. At one moment it seems more possible than at another. And for my part I don’t let these things go at once but keep thinking about them, sometimes long after other people consider that they’re already decided. But, old chap, it’s so difficult for me, because for me it becomes so much a matter of conscience that I would be too much of a burden to you — perhaps abuse your friendship if I accept money for an enterprise that may not pay. You write again about Moniteur Universel. Do you think it too gloomy of me when I tell you that I regard it as possible that in a relatively few years’ time a number of large art businesses — for example Moniteur Universel — in a word others that have also expanded enormously — will decline — fall into decline as quickly as they came up? In a relatively short space of time, everything that is the art trade developed in rapport with art itself. But it became all too much a sort of bankers’ speculation and it still is — I do not say entirely — — I simply say much too much. Why, in so far as it’s a bubble company, shouldn’t it go the same way as, for instance, the tulip trade? You’ll point out to me that a painting isn’t a tulip. Of course there’s a universe of difference, and naturally I, who love paintings and tulips not at all, am very well aware of this. 
   But I contend that many rich people who buy the expensive paintings for one reason or another don’t do it for the artistic value that they see in them — the difference between tulip and painting that you and I see isn’t visible to them — they, the speculators and blasé sots and a lot of others, would buy tulips now too, just as in the past, provided there was a certain cachet to it. True, there are real, sterling art lovers. But it’s perhaps only 1/10th of the total of the business that’s done, perhaps it’s even a much smaller proportion — of which it can be said: this or that transaction was genuinely out of belief in art. I could expand on this forever of course, but without going on about it any more I believe that you agree with me that there’s a great deal in the art trade that could prove to be hot air in the future. Things that are very highly priced now can go down. If you ask me, can Millet and Corot go down, I say, yes, IN PRICE. Anyway, from an artistic point of view, Millet is Millet, Corot Corot, fixed — as the sun itself, in my view. Five years ago I thought differently about it, in so far as I thought that Millet, say, would remain fixed, EVEN in price, but since then — precisely because I see Millet is usually just as much utterly misunderstood now that he’s less concealed and is more in evidence in reproductions, for instance, as when he was despised — I fear he’ll remain somewhat outside public taste and — it isn’t certain that those who understand him best will have to pay as much money for him later as they do now. Rembrandt fell too — in price — in the periwig age.
   I just want to ask you frankly, do you believe that the prices that are still being paid now will stay? I tell you frankly, I do not believe it. Yet at the same time, to me Millet is Millet, Rembrandt Rembrandt, Israëls Israëls &c., whether it costs ten cents or a hundred thousand to buy one of his paintings. Consequently I don’t think about the art trade much. Only when my thoughts turn to you and I come to ask you whether you can take pleasure in it, or whether, especially later, you won’t see all too much that goes against the grain with you to stay in it. You’ll say, one can get used to anything, or rather you’ll say, one must endure until the heart breaks in us. So be it, I agree with you in that — but if the heart does break in us, we’re still free to act in one way or another. And as regards you or me, we are what we are, and because we’re enthusiastic about art, we would each in our own way also remain constant in our opinion about Millet, say, even if the most absurd things were to happen. But I ask: in the event of a gradual cooling off in the expenditure of tremendous sums for paintings, how are the huge firms which have colossal sums in outgoings etc. every year, which cut into their profits, going to succeed? They’ll soon find themselves with enormous deficits. Trees like this don’t fall at the first blow, but they can rot away inside and ultimately fall because of the wind alone, without a single blow from an axe. When? I have absolutely no idea of the exact date. 
   If you will, just write to me about this question in general, for example what you think of the staying power — in the long run — of an establishment such as you say Moniteur Universel is — or Petit8 — or Arnold & Tripp. I tell you frankly, I don’t see that it can keep going in the long run. I believe something like this has to collapse. In my view, it can’t be very pleasant to be on hand for this — I’d rather sit by a peat fire, painting. The art trade, one feels a sort of ‘what do I care’ about it, except — except — except — that I personally find it very unpleasant if I’m really very short of money. You’ve always remained calm in Paris, very simple and certainly cooler than a man like Tripp, say. You’re out to see things as they are, you — like me — can’t help analyzing. And yet, even you don’t in the first place bring what you know of a situation to bear in order to profit from that situation all the same. I mean, it isn’t in your nature to fish in troubled waters. But I ask you frankly, what’s the position? Do you really believe that the people at Moniteur Universel will ask something different of employees from what G&Cie asks? Moniteur, G&Cie, Tripp, Petit, to me they’re all similar firms. I believe in my own case that, having been thrown out by one, I would be thrown out by them all. If old Goupil says, you’re no good to us, I believe other bosses would also think more or less the same. Well, as to you, I believe that it would be the same for you with another house as it is with G&Cie. 
   In my opinion, setting up for oneself at a time when a cooling off and decline could be foreseen is something that one cannot do with any enthusiasm. So do you believe in these times, do you believe that the trade will stay at this level? If you believed this, I would respect your opinion and keep quiet, but I don’t know whether you know that I don’t really believe that the very large firms can keep going. Do write to me about it, then it will be so much easier for me to talk about it. I feel rather embarrassed with you at the moment, and I want you to know my perhaps nervous opinion that firstly I don’t believe that these highly inflated firms can keep going and, secondly, even should they prove to keep going, I wouldn’t enjoy being involved in them, directly or indirectly. Another thing is, if I can provide for myself by doing this or that here or there, I won’t look such a gift horse in the mouth. If it proves to be my duty to do this or that, very well, I won’t refuse the work, not even unpleasant work. I thought of you brother, on my long trudge across the heath on that stormy evening. I thought of a passage, I don’t know which book it’s from, 
   two eyes awake, brightened by genuine tears11 — I thought, I am disillusioned, that is — I thought — I have believed in many things that I now know are in a sorry state at bottom — I thought, these eyes of mine, here on this gloomy evening, awake here in the solitude, if there have been tears in them from time to time, why should they not have been wrung from me by such sorrow that it disenchants — yes — and banishes illusions — but at the same time — awakens one? I thought, is it POSSIBLE that Theo is easy about many things that I’m uneasy about.  Could it be just melancholy, that I can’t take the old pleasure in this or in that? In short, I thought, can I be mistaking gold for gilding? Am I mistaking something that’s in full growth for something withering? I couldn’t come up with an answer for myself. Can you? Do you know for sure that there isn’t already far-advanced, unrelenting decline on all sides? Give me courage if you yourself have courage — but I say to you in my turn ‘don’t flatter me’. I tell you that, as far as I’m concerned, even if I become clever (which I am not noticeably as yet), I believe — firmly believe — that I’ll always be very poor — it will exceed my expectations if I manage to keep out of debt. The coming men in Holland after those mastodons Mesdag, Israëls, Mauve, Blommers, Maris &c. will, under no circumstances, still be able to earn what was earned in those days, that is the last 20 years, say. And especially not if they’re clever. 
   One of the drawbacks of a period like the one we’re entering is that a time when prices are inflated so high is, as it were, taking a lien on the future, which makes the future dark for posterity. So, old chap, perhaps Arnold & Tripp have never treated you personally anything other than very courteously or, in short, with due form. That doesn’t alter the fact that you, who are just as clever as Uncle Cent, for instance, won’t be able to do what Uncle Cent did. Why not? Because there are too many Arnold & Tripps in the world. Insatiable money-grubbers, that’s to say, compared with whom you are a sheep. Please don’t take this as an insult, brother, that I make this comparison. It’s better to be a sheep than a wolf, it’s better to be the one who is killed than the one who kills — namely better to be Abel than Cain. And — and — I myself am not a wolf either, I hope, or rather I know. Suppose that both you and I are ‘sheep’ in society, not in our imaginations but in truth. Very well — given fairly hungry and vicious wolves — it wouldn’t be beyond the bounds of possibility that we’d be gobbled up. Well, even then, although I don’t think this would be exactly pleasant, in short it’s surely still better after all to be ruined than to ruin someone else. I mean, it’s no reason to lose one’s serenity if one should realize that one might have to lead a life of poverty while one had the skills, the talents, the aptitude with which others grow rich. I’m not indifferent to money, but I don’t envy the wolves. Now, with a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. If you will, answer me some of these things while I’m here at home; I’m here to get some rest and resolution.  My dear Theo, I lay awake half the night, Theo, after I’d written to you yesterday evening. I’m heartbroken about the fact that when I come back now, after an absence of two years, the reception at home was as friendly and kind as could be, yet at bottom nothing, nothing, nothing has changed in what I have to call blindness and stupidity to the point of desperation when it comes to understanding the situation. Which was that we were going along in the very best of ways until the moment when Pa banned me from the house — not just in a passion but also ‘because he was tired of it’. It should have been understood then that this was something so important to my succeeding or not succeeding that it was made ten times more difficult for me because of it — almost intolerable. If I hadn’t felt the same then as I feel again now, that despite all the good intentions, despite all the friendliness of the reception, despite whatever you will, there’s a certain steely hardness and icy coldness, something in Pa that grates like dry sand, glass or tin — despite all his outward mildness — if I hadn’t already, I say, felt it then as I do now, I wouldn’t have taken it so badly then. Now I’m once again in almost unbearable indecision and inner conflict. You understand that I wouldn’t write as I write — having undertaken the journey here of my own volition, having been the first to swallow my pride — if there wasn’t really something I’m running up against. 
   If I had now seen that there was any WILLINGNESS to do as the Rappards did with the best results2 and as we began here, also with good results, if I had now seen that Pa had also realized that he should not have barred the house to me, I would have been reassured about the future. Nothing, nothing of all that. There wasn’t then, nor is there now any trace, any hint of a shadow of a doubt in Pa as to whether he did the right thing then. Pa doesn’t know remorse as you and I and everyone who is human does. Pa believes in his own righteousness while you, I and other human beings are permeated with the feeling that we consist of mistakes and forlorn attempts. I pity people like Pa, I can’t find it in my heart to be angry with them because I believe that they’re unhappier than I am myself. Why do I think they’re unhappier? Because they use even the good in them wrongly so that it works as evil — because the light that’s in them is black — spreads darkness, gloom3 around them. Their friendly reception desolates me — to me, the way they make the best of it, without recognizing the mistake, is even worse, if possible, than the mistake itself. 
   Instead of readily understanding and consequently promoting both my and indirectly their own well-being with a degree of fervour, I sense a procrastination and hesitancy in everything, which paralyzes my own passion and energy like a leaden atmosphere. My intellect as a man tells me that I have to regard it as an unalterable fact of fate that Pa and I are irreconcilable down to the deepest depths. My compassion both for Pa and for myself tells me ‘irreconcilable? never’ — until eternity there’s a chance, one has to believe in the chance of an ultimate reconciliation. But the latter, oh why is it sadly probably ‘an illusion’? Will you think that I’m making too much of things? Our life is an awful reality and we ourselves go on into eternity, what is — is — and our view, weighty or less weighty, takes nothing from and adds nothing to the essence of things. That’s how I think about it when I’m lying awake at night, for instance, or that’s how I think about it in the storm in the sad twilight in the evening on the heath. Perhaps I sometimes appear as insensitive as a wild pig during the day in everyday life, and I can readily understand that people find me coarse. When I was younger I used to think much more than now that the problem lay in coincidences or little things or misunderstandings that were groundless. But as I get older I draw back from that more and more, and I see deeper grounds. Life’s ‘an odd thing’, brother. 
   You can see how up and down my letters are, first I think it’s possible, then again it’s impossible. One thing is clear to me, that it doesn’t happen readily, as I said, that there’s no ‘willingness’. I’ve decided to go to Rappard and tell him that I would like it too if I could be at home, but that against all the advantages that this would have there’s a je ne sais quoi with Pa that I’m afraid I’m beginning to think is incurable, and that makes me apathetic and powerless. Yesterday evening it’s decided that I’ll be here for a while, the next morning, despite everything, we’re back to — let’s think about it again. Go ahead, sleep on it, think about it!!! As if they hadn’t had 2 YEARS to think about it, ought to have thought about it as a matter of course, as the natural thing. Two years, every day a day of worry for me, for them — normal life — as if nothing had happened or nothing would happen. The burden didn’t weigh on them. You say, they don’t express it but they feel it. i don’t believe that. I’ve sometimes thought it myself, but it’s not right.  People act AS they feel. Our actions, our swift readiness or our hesitation, that’s how we can be recognized — not by what we say with our lips7 — friendly or unfriendly. Good intentions, opinions, in fact that’s less than nothing. You may think of me what you will, Theo, but I tell you it’s not my imagination, I tell you, Pa is not willing. I see now what I saw then, I spoke out four-square AGAINST Pa then, I speak now in any event, whatever may come of it, AGAINST PA again, as being UNwilling, as making it IMPOSSIBLE. It’s damned sad, brother, the Rappards acted intelligently, but here!!!!!! And everything you did and do about it,  3/4  of it is rendered fruitless by them. It’s wretched, brother. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. I don’t care so much about a friendly or unfriendly reception, what grieves me is that they aren’t sorry for what they did then. They think that THEY DIDN’T DO ANYTHING then, and for me that’s going too far. My dear Theo, It’s still early; I wanted to add a word or two to my letter of yesterday in order to try to make a few things clearer to you. But I ask you to regard what I tell you in this letter as something I would keep silent about if I didn’t think I could rely on your discretion and intelligence. I haven’t said a word to Pa and Ma about the real question of two years ago. I have, though, spoken about a side issue at that time. For their part, Pa and Ma don’t even mention her name. Very well — they don’t have to speak to me about it, nor I to them. I did touch on it indirectly, though; I told Pa that in my view it was a great mistake that at a certain point (two years ago) I was forced to leave the house. I said that not only had considerable financial harm been the consequence, but also that, driven to the limit, I had been forced to go to extremes much more, to much greater intransigence than I would have displayed of my own free will alone. I pointed to the example of the Rappard family in contrast to the Van Gogh family. I pointed out how Rappard also has differences with his father about this or that, but that they always avoid extremes not only for the world but also for themselves and, although he doesn’t earn a penny from his work (which is nonetheless very sound, very fine even), Rappard can still always face the world with dignity, also in so far as equipment and studio &c. are concerned. And how the family makes sure there are no debts anywhere with colourmen &c. I told Pa how noble, how stalwart and how clear-sighted I thought it was of you, Theo, that you’ve always helped me in so far as it was at all possible for you. I pointed out how, if Pa hadn’t been so steely and obstinate and in short unintelligent then, your help would have been effective, whereas now your help wasn’t effective and we’ve only half succeeded. So to that extent I certainly did touch on the past. At the same time I pointed out that at this moment it’s again difficult for me to avoid extremes, since the relationship to the family in general in which I feel I stand is so bad that it’s becoming clear to me that the bond between you and me cannot endure if everything is always just left as it is. 
   That when I think about whether it’s right or wrong to accept money from you, I have to take appearances into consideration.  I tell you frankly that I find the spirit in our family, particularly Pa’s and also, for instance, C.M.’s, more and more wrong. My position vis-à-vis you now is this: on the one hand I believe that there’s still a possibility that your character, like mine, will go back on many of the things we were taught; yes, I say, I think it possible that you’ll have a change of heart, be it gradual, be it sudden, so that you’ll find yourself compelled to adopt another outlook on life, and that perhaps the upshot will be that you’ll yet become a painter. On the other hand, this is in stark contrast, for example, to what you said this summer: ‘I’m becoming more and more like Pa’. In the event of this last — that is, that you became more and more a ‘Van Gogh’, became a character like Pa or C.M. and by always being involved in business acquired an outlook on life entirely different from mine — a trader’s spirit, that is became a more or less political person — well, to be quite frank, then I’d rather not be intimate with you, then I’d find it better that, rather than strengthening bonds, we should let each other go, understanding we didn’t belong together. At present I’m observing Pa — I see, I hear, I feel what Pa is — and I don’t like it — decidedly not. If you are thus, if you’re becoming more and more thus — then it’s wise to part. 
   Now I return to what I said to Pa, that it was a mistake that we quarrelled so seriously two years ago that the house has been barred to me since then — (whose fault it was doesn’t even matter that much; it would have been in accordance with Pa’s own principles — if he had maintained them consistently — that the quarrel itself should have been avoided — avoided come what may). What does Pa say to this? Yes, but I can’t take back anything I did then, I’ve always done everything for your own good, and I’ve always acted on my sincere opinion. To which I replied that a person’s ‘opinion’ may sometimes be diametrically opposed to his conscience, I mean what one THINKS one should do and what one ought to do may be diametrically opposed to one another. I told Pa that terms may be found in the Bible itself to judge whether our ‘opinions’ are fair and just. And that Pa was all too much in the habit of failing to do this and going on hot-headedly — in my view very unjustly, very arbitrarily, very reprehensibly — according to his ‘opinion’ — not — according to his conscience. Enough, so I was faced with an iron barrier of irreconcilability indeed, although Pa tried to mask it, tried to lead me around it and to divert me from pursuing it. But I didn’t allow myself to be put off by this, and said — Pa, this is about your self-righteousness, which was and is fatal for you and for me. Then Pa said, ‘did you think I would go down on my knees to you?’ I said I took it very ill of Pa, thought it extremely crude, that Pa saw only that in it, and that I wouldn’t waste my breath on it any longer. Pa doesn’t have to tell me that he acted badly towards me, but Pa should have learnt what I learnt in those two years — that it was a great mistake in itself, and that it should have been redressed immediately without asking whose fault it was. 
   So brother, in my view Pa eternally descends into petty-mindedness instead of being more open, more liberal, broader, more humane. It was minister’s vanity that drove things to extremes then, and it’s still the same minister’s vanity that will still cause more mischief in the present and the future. I don’t ask you to intercede, I ask you for something more personal, I ask you frankly: how do we stand towards each other; are you a ‘Van Gogh’ too? I always regarded you as ‘Theo’. In character I’m quite different from the various members of the family, and I’m actually not a ‘Van Gogh’. But if you were to become a personality — played a part in the world like Pa or C.M. or Uncle V. even, very well, I wouldn’t interfere with that, I would accept you as you were, I would keep silent about it, but our paths would diverge too greatly for me to be able to continue regarding the financial tie advisable, as it stands now. I hope you’ll understand me. If not, we’ll have to give it time. Who knows if, in the next 3 years, you won’t start to view some questions more or less as I do. Why? Because you’ll also be influenced by art and by mixing with artists, and in short may perhaps become squarer and broader in consequence instead of narrower and more constricted. Well old chap — if you can, see to it that I can get away from here — regards and believe me Ever yours, Vincent. Dear brother, I feel what Pa and Ma instinctively think about me (I don’t say reasonably). There’s a similar reluctance about taking me into the house as there would be about having a large, shaggy dog in the house. He’ll come into the room with wet paws — and then, he’s so shaggy. He’ll get in everyone’s way. And he barks so loudly. In short — it’s a dirty animal. Very well — but the animal has a human history and, although it’s a dog, a human soul, and one with finer feelings at that, able to feel what people think about him, which an ordinary dog can’t do. And I, admitting that I am a sort of dog, accept them as they are. This home is also too good for me, and Pa and Ma and the family are so unduly fine (no feelings, though)1 and — and — they are ministers — many ministers. So the dog recognizes that if they were to keep him it would be too much a question of putting up with him, of tolerating him ‘in this house’, so he’ll see about finding himself a kennel somewhere else. The dog may actually have been Pa’s son at one time, and Pa himself really left him out in the street rather too much, where he inevitably became rougher, but since Pa himself forgot that years ago and actually never thought profoundly about what a bond between father and son meant, there’s nothing to be said. 
   Then — the dog might perhaps bite — if he were to go mad — and the village constable would have to come round and shoot him dead. Very well — yes, all that, most certainly, it is true. On the other hand, dogs are guards. But there’s no need for that, it’s peace, and there’s no danger, there are no problems, they say. So then I keep silent. The dog is just sorry that he didn’t stay away, because it wasn’t as lonely on the heath as it is in this house — despite all the friendliness. The animal’s visit was a weakness that I hope people will forget, and one that he’ll avoid lapsing into again. Since I’ve had no expenses in the time I’ve been here, and because I received money from you twice here, I paid for the journey myself and also paid myself for the clothes that Pa bought because mine weren’t good enough, yet at the same time I’ve repaid the 25 guilders from friend Rappard. I think you’ll be pleased that this has been done, it looked so careless. 
   Dear Theo, Enclosed is the letter I was engaged in writing when I received your letter. To which, having read what you say attentively, I want to reply. I’ll start by saying that I think it noble of you, believing that I’m making it difficult for Pa, to take his part and give me a brisk telling-off. I regard this as something that I value in you, even though you’re taking up arms against someone who is neither Pa’s enemy nor yours, but who definitely does, however, give Pa and you some serious questions to consider. Telling you what I tell you, that being what I feel, and asking: why is this so? In many respects, moreover, your answers to various passages in my letter make me see sides to the questions that aren’t unfamiliar to me either. Your objections are in part my own objections, but not sufficiently. So I see once more your good will, your desire at the same time to achieve reconciliation and peace — which indeed I don’t doubt. But brother, I could also raise very many objections to your tips, only I think that would be a long-drawn-out way and that there’s a shorter way. There’s a desire for peace and for reconciliation in Pa and in you and in me. And yet we don’t seem to be able to bring peace about. 
   I now believe that I’m the stumbling block, and so I must try to work something out so that I don’t ‘make it difficult’ for you or for Pa any more. I’m now prepared to make it as easy as possible, as tranquil as possible, for both Pa and you. So you also think that it’s I who make it difficult for Pa and that I’m cowardly. So — well then, I’ll try to keep everything shut up inside me, away from Pa and from you. What’s more, I won’t visit Pa again, and I’ll stick to my proposal (for the sake of mutual freedom of thought, for the sake of not making it DIFFICULT for you either, which I fear is already inadvertently starting to be your opinion) to put an end to our agreement about the money by March, if you approve. I’m deliberately leaving an interval for the sake of order and so that I’ll have time to take some steps that really have very little chance of success, but which my conscience won’t allow me to postpone in the circumstances. You must accept this calmly and accept it with good grace, brother — it isn’t giving you an ultimatum. But if our feelings diverge too far, well then, we mustn’t force ourselves to act as if nothing is happening. Isn’t this your opinion too, to some extent?
   You know very well, don’t you, that I consider that you’ve saved my life, that I shall never forget, I’m not only your brother, your friend, even after we put an end to relations that I fear would create a false position, but at the same time I have an infinite obligation of loyalty for what you did in the past by stretching out your hand to me and by continuing to help me. Money can be repaid, not kindness such as yours. So let me get on with it — only I’m disappointed that a thoroughgoing reconciliation hasn’t come about now — and I’d wish that it still could, only you people don’t understand me and I fear that perhaps you never will. Send me the usual by return, if you can, then I won’t have to ask Pa for anything when I leave, which I ought to do as soon as possible. 


I  
gave 
the 
whole  
 of 
the 
23
. 
guilders 
of 1 Dec.
 
to 
Pa


(having borrowed 14 guilders, and shoes and trousers came to 9 guilders)


,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
25
,,
,,
10
 
,,
Rappard


  I only have a quarter and a few cents in my pocket. So that is the account, which you will now understand when, in addition, you know that from the 20 Nov. money, which came 1 Dec., I paid for the lodgings in Drenthe for a long period, because there had been some hitch then that was later put right, and from the 14 guilders (which I borrowed from Pa and have since given back) I paid for my journey etc. I’m going from here to Rappard’s. And from Rappard’s perhaps to Mauve’s. My plan, then, is to try to do everything in calmness, in order. 
   There’s too much in my frankly expressed opinion about Pa that I cannot take back in the circumstances. I appreciate your objections, but many of them I cannot regard as sufficient, others I already thought of myself, even though I wrote what I wrote. I set out my feelings in strong words, and of course they’re modified by appreciation of very much that’s good in Pa — of course that modification is considerable. Let me tell you that I didn’t know that someone aged 30 was ‘a boy’, particularly not when he may have experienced more than just anyone in those 30 years. Regard my words as the words of a boy if you wish, though. I am not liable for your interpretation of what I say, am I? That is your business. As to Pa, I’ll also take the liberty of putting what he thinks out of my mind as soon as we part company. It may be politic to keep what one thinks to oneself, however it has always seemed to me that a painter, above all, had a duty to be sincere — you yourself once pointed out to me that whether people understand what I say, whether people judge me rightly or wrongly, didn’t alter the truth about me. Well brother, know that, even if there’s any sort of a separation, I am, perhaps much more even than you know or feel, your friend and even Pa’s friend. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. In any event I’m not an enemy of Pa’s or yours, nor shall ever be that. 
   I’ve thought again about your remarks since I wrote the enclosed letter, and I’ve also spoken to Pa again. I had as good as definitely made up my mind not to stay here — regardless of how it would be taken or what might come of it — when, though, the conversation took a turn because I said: I’ve been here for a fortnight now and I don’t feel any further forward than in the first half hour. If only we’d understood each other better we’d have got all sorts of things sorted out and settled by now — I can’t waste time and I have to decide. A door has to be open or shut. I don’t understand anything in between, and in fact it can’t exist. It has now ended up that the little room at home where the mangle is now will be at my disposal as a storeroom for my bits and pieces, as a studio too, should circumstances make this desirable. And that they’ve now started emptying the room, which wasn’t the case at first, when the case was still pending then.  I do want to tell you something that I’ve since understood better than when I wrote to you about what I thought of Pa. I’ve softened my opinion, partly because I believe I detect in Pa (and one of your tips would support this to some extent) signs that, indeed, he can’t follow me when I try to explain something. Gets stuck in part of what I say, which becomes wrong when it’s taken out of context. There may well be more than one reason for this, but old age is certainly to blame for a large part of it. Now, I respect old age and its weaknesses too, as you do, even though it may not seem so to you or you may not believe it of me. I mean that I probably humour Pa in some things that I would take amiss in a man with his full faculties — for the aforementioned reason. 
   I also thought of Michelet’s saying (which he had from a zoologist), ‘the male is very wild’. And because now, at this stage in my life, I know that I have strong passions, and so I should have, in my opinion — looking at myself I see that perhaps I am ‘very wild’. And yet, my passion abates when I’m faced with one who is weaker; then I don’t fight. Although, for that matter, taking issue in words or about principles with a man who, mark you, occupies a position in society concerned with guiding people’s spiritual lives is, to be sure, not only permitted but cannot in any way be cowardly. For after all, our weapons are equal. Give this some thought, if you will, particularly since I tell you that, for many reasons, I want to give up even the battle of words because I sometimes think that Pa is no longer able to concentrate the full force of his thoughts on a single point. In some cases, after all, a man’s age may be an added strength. Going to the heart of the matter, I take this opportunity to tell you that I believe that it’s precisely because of Pa’s influence that you’ve concentrated more on business than was in your nature. And that I believe that, even though you’re now so sure of your case that you must remain a dealer, a certain something in your original nature will still keep on working and perhaps react more than you expect. 
   Since I know that our thoughts crossed each other in our first years with G&Cie, that is that both you and I thought then about becoming painters, but so deeply that we didn’t dare to say it straight out then, even to each other, it could well be that in these later years we draw closer together. All the more so because of the effect of circumstances and conditions in the trade itself, which in the meantime has already changed compared with our early days and, in my view, will go on changing more and more. I forced myself so much at the time, and I was so burdened by a conviction that I was certainly not a painter that, even when I left G&Cie, I didn’t turn my thoughts to it but to something else (which was in turn a second mistake, over and above the first). Being discouraged then about the possibility, because diffident, very diffident approaches to a few painters weren’t even noticed. What I’m telling you is not because I want to force you to think like me — I force no one — I’m just telling you it in brotherly, in friendly confidence. My views may sometimes be out of proportion; that may be so. Yet I believe that there must be some truth in the nature of them, and in the action and direction. That I myself have now worked on getting the house here open again, even to the extent of having a studio here — I’m not doing it in the first place or primarily out of self-interest. 
 0  In this I see that even though we don’t understand each other in many things, there’s always a will to cooperate between you, Pa and myself, albeit in fits and starts. Since the estrangement has already lasted so long, it can’t do any harm to try to place some weight on the other side, so that we shouldn’t appear to the world, too, as being more divided than is the case, so as not to lapse into extremes in the eyes of the world. Rappard says to me, ‘a human being isn’t a lump of peat, in so far as a human being can’t bear to be thrown up in the loft like a lump of peat and be forgotten there’ — and he points out that he thought it a great misfortune for me that I couldn’t be at home. Give this some thought, if you will. I believe that it has been regarded a little too much as if I acted capriciously or recklessly or, well, you know it better than I do, whereas I was more or less forced into things, and could do nothing other than what they wanted to see in it. And it was precisely the biased view of seeing base objectives &c. in me that made me very cold and fairly indifferent towards many people. Brother, once again — think a great deal at this stage in your life; I believe that you’re in danger of taking a distorted view of many things, and I believe that you should examine your life’s aim once more, and that then your life WILL BE BETTER. I don’t say it as if I knew it and as if you didn’t know it, I say it because I’m increasingly coming to see that it’s so terribly difficult to know where one is right and where one is wrong. My dear Theo, Mauve said to me at the time, ‘you’ll find yourself if you keep on working at art, if you go into it more deeply than you have done so far’. He said that 2 years ago. I think a lot about those words of his these days. I have found myself — I am that dog. Now my idea may be somewhat overstated — the reality less pronounced in its contrasts — less absolutely dramatic — yet I believe the rough character sketch is fundamentally true. The shaggy sheepdog I tried to get you to understand in my letter yesterday  it’s my character, and the animal’s life is my life, if, that is, one leaves out the details and simply gives the essentials. This may seem exaggerated to you — but I don’t take it back. For the sake of analysis, no personalities involved, just as a character study, I refer you once more to last summer impartially as if I spoke about strangers rather than about you and me and Pa. I see two brothers walking in The Hague (view them as strangers, other people, don’t think of yourself or of me or Pa). One of them says, ‘I’m becoming more and more like Pa — I have a certain position to keep up — a certain affluence (very modest in both your case and Pa’s)  I must stay in the trade, I don’t believe that I’ll become a painter’. The other says — ‘I’m becoming less and less like Pa — I’m becoming a dog, I feel that the future will probably make me uglier and rougher, and I see “a certain poverty” as my lot — but — but — i will be a painter and, man or dog, in short a being with feeling’. 

So  
the  
one, 
a  
certain  
position or affluence
and a 


businessman
 
 
 


,,
,,
other,  
,,
,,
poverty and exclusion   
,,


painter. And I see those same two brothers in earlier years — when you were just coming into the world of painting, just beginning to read &c. &c. — by the mill in Rijswijk. Or, for example, on an outing to Chaam in the winter, across the snow-covered heath, early in the morning!2 feeling so much the same, thinking and believing so much the same — that I ask myself — are they the same people??? Question — what will happen now? — will they part company forever, or will they find the same path once and for all? 
   I tell you, I choose the said dog’s path, I’ll remain a dog, I’ll be poor, I’ll be a painter, I want to remain human, in nature. To my mind, anyone who turns away from nature, whose head always has to be full of keeping this up or keeping that up, even if things like that take him away from nature, to such an extent that he can’t help saying it — oh — in this way one so easily arrives, in my view, at a point where one can no longer distinguish white from black — and — and one becomes precisely the opposite of what one is taken to be or thinks oneself to be. For instance — at this moment you still have a manly fear of mediocrity in the bad sense of the word. Why are you nonetheless going to kill, extinguish the best in your soul? Then, yes then, that fear could well come true. How does one become mediocre? By going along with this today and conforming to that tomorrow, as the world wants, and by not speaking out against the world and by only following public opinion! Understand me clearly, what I’m saying is that at bottom you’re better than that — I see it in you when, for example, you take Pa’s part when you think I’ve made it difficult for Pa. Permit me to say that in my view you’re directing your opposition wrongly in this case, but I do appreciate exactly that, and I say, at the same time be sensible, direct that anger at something else and fight with that strength against some influences other than mine, of all things — and — and then you’ll probably get less upset. 
   I don’t differ with Pa when I consider Pa in himself, but I do differ with Pa when I compare Pa with the great père Millet, say. His doctrine3 is so great that Pa’s way of looking at things seems extremely petty beside it. You will think this terrible of me — I can do nothing about it — it’s my conviction, deep inside me, and I stick up for it because you confuse Pa’s character with Corot’s, for instance. How do I see Pa? As a person of similar character to Corot’s father, but Pa has nothing of Corot himself. Corot did love his father, but he didn’t follow him. I love Pa, too, so long as my path isn’t made too difficult by a difference of opinion. I do not love Pa at a moment when a certain petty-minded pride stands in the way of the generous and conclusive achievement of a complete, definitive and so desirable reconciliation. Measures I envisaged and which also brought me here were in no way intended to cause Pa or you expense, but on the contrary to make better use of your money so that we lose less, that is, less time, less money and less energy. Am I to be condemned in this respect when I point to the Rappards who, although they’re wealthier than Pa or you or I, go about things more sensibly and get better results through unity, even though it’s probably not always very easy for them either? Am I to be condemned when I wanted to say ‘thus far and no further’ to a division in the family? In what respect am I wrong when I want it to be through and through and conclusive and am not content with a sham or too feeble a reconciliation? Reconciliation with reservations, conditions etc., bah! — I refuse to accept it. Readily or not at all; willingly, or else it’s utterly pointless and worse can be foreseen. 
   You say that you think it cowardly of me to rebel against Pa — in the first place this rebellion is in words — there’s no violence here. It can be seen from another side, that is, that I’m all the sadder and more disappointed and speak all the more earnestly and resolutely precisely because Pa’s grey hair tells me that the time that we have for reconciliation is verily perhaps not very long. I don’t think much of deathbed reconciliations, I’d rather see them during life. I’m prepared to admit that Pa means well, but I would so infinitely prefer it if it weren’t to stop at intentions but might at least sometime, albeit very late, lead to a mutual understanding. If I have to fear that ‘this will never happen’, if you only knew how sad I find that, if you only knew how I grieve about it. You say — Pa does have other things on his mind — really — well then, I myself feel how unimportant those things, which prevent Pa’s mind from thinking things through year in and year out, appear to me. Well, that’s precisely it. Pa doesn’t believe that there’s anything to reconcile or make up, Pa thinks about other things — very well — I’m beginning to say now: leave him to his other things. And you stick to your ‘other things’ too. Pa says ‘we’ve always been good after all’ &c. I say — really? — are you satisfied?  I’m not.  Something better than the time of the Rijswijk mill — namely the same once and for all — two poor brothers, artists — bound up in the same feeling for the same nature and art — will it ever come to that? The certain position, the certain affluence, will they win out? Oh, let them win out  but that it will be only for a time that ends with your disappointment in this respect, is what I foresee will happen before you’re 30. And if not — Well, if not, then — then — then — Too BAD. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter today, as well as a letter from friend Rappard by the same post. Let me start by thanking you for the money. And let me say right after that, that I appreciate it, both in you and in Rappard, that you people approve of my coming here. This gave me courage at a moment when I myself couldn’t have been more discouraged about that deed, coming here, and had the most lively regret about it, because for my part I saw, deep down in all those conversations I had with Pa, a je ne sais quoi of coolly refusing to commit himself in case of a reconciliation, and this made me desperate because I realized that a cankerous root would remain, which would later make everything impossible, as before, yet again. But your letter and a very intelligent, very sympathetic, very cordial missive from friend Rappard, and your respective opinions to the effect that my journey here could bring about something good, have led me for the moment to regard the case as not yet being lost, and to employ patience and wisdom. Have patience with me, brother, and don’t suspect me of unwillingness. For my part, I know Pa very intimately and from close quarters in many respects, and in the situation we’re faced with I couldn’t just let everything rest. I had to hear what Pa said about this and about that so as to compare it with certain precedents. I turned the conversation to subjects that aren’t even the actual issues, for instance, and already got in enough of a scrape then. 
   As for your advice ‘don’t talk to them about certain things’, you should know, I believe that you have something well-observed in mind.  But in the past the matter was actually (I mean for me personally, at least) of the utmost, utmost import — and embarking on a new future with Pa is again a very important thing, which no one can ask me to begin by letting absolutely all those things rest. At the moment, too, particularly after receipt of your letter, Pa and I are getting on as well as is possible, and Pa is even not disinclined to make certain arrangements. Know, moreover, that for my part I’m in complete agreement with you that they mean well; I don’t suspect them of wishing me any misfortune, even though they cause it from time to time, or deliberately placing obstacles in my path, even though I may be thwarted by them (not without good intentions, Mauve would say). But Pa’s character is exceedingly changeable and at the same time exceedingly stubborn — (I’m very well aware that most people don’t know that), Pa’s character is dark (the black ray, as I once reminded you), there’s something very narrow-minded, or rather icy cold, about Pa. I can’t express it, but do feel it. I’ve thought a great deal about this question, I’ve watched Pa closely, I know Pa from many sides, I’ve very often tried to come to an agreement with Pa, I also appreciate the good in Pa. I appreciate the good in Pa, but yet I think that Pa is not good. 
   I cannot say that I think Pa is straightforward, or simple and clear enough. And now there’s a continuing je ne sais quoi that causes me concern, and right through everything I detect the same fatal element as in the past. It struck me, Theo, that friend Rappard writes to me now that he observed in me how much I changed in the summer of the year I spent in Etten — (it was then that I met her). And at the same time he lets me see that he understands that something happened then, although he doesn’t know what. And seems to ask: did it turn out all right? In my view, Pa and Ma and several others weren’t very sensitive then. If you could agree with me in this, I’d say to you, Theo, they’re equally insensitive now, and you would understand it. And so, although you need not attach importance to any conversations with Pa at the outset, which I chiefly undertook just to find out what Pa thought, although those are nothing and at this moment, for instance, an arrangement could be made which would make the work easier for me in many respects and give me the peace and quiet to work, I see right from the outset a je ne sais quoi, particularly in Pa, that causes me concern, a heavy, silent concern about the future. Keeping the peace with Pa will be a hard job. I now understand my own attitude of opposition in former times again. I don’t say that it can lead to nothing, but I point out to you — it will be difficult. 
   You’ll point out to me something I’ve thought of myself, that I personally am also difficult to get on with in many respects. Yes, there’s that, too, and I take it into account too. There’s an excuse for me, and that is the passion as well as the frequent absorption that everyone who paints, writes or composes must have by the very nature of the thing. Is it the same with Pa? No — it’s something different. If you say, but Pa is also a thinker and a writer — then I reply — I wish he were that in a different way, because now I can’t say that he’s happy. I say this with more melancholy than you perhaps think, I’m serious in what I say. Is it impossible for you to go along with that? In the desperation of the moment I wrote you my last letter, in which I fundamentally say ‘it cannot be done after all, and I see a certain separation from Pa — irrevocably and with éclat — as the only thing I can do; if I don’t do that, then I have the semblance of agreeing with someone whose principles I don’t even respect, and I don’t want to have even the semblance of going along with him because I am utterly against him, absolutely against’. So, brother, there you have what was in my last letter. Now, though, your letter and a letter from Rappard arrive together today, written in a tone that I can understand and appreciate. And after I talk to Pa again, there’s a provisional arrangement and calm. A calm which is indeed it but far more still not yet it at all. What to do? 
   Yes — what to do? I must tell you that I don’t choose to experience the same thing as 2 years ago again. It doesn’t only depend on me to keep the peace (any more than it only depended on me at that time). Can one, MAY one keep the peace with Pa? Perhaps you don’t understand this — that I even add ‘MAY’. Go so far as to say that. I’ll give you an example. You, Rappard, I, if people reproach us for something — undeservedly, say — we’ll stand our ground and reply, and just show our claws for a moment. But precisely because we are who we are, we will NOT say, you may not reproach me for anything. We would say, reproach away, I stand up to you. But Pa sees sacrilege in observations that aren’t even reproaches, unavoidable observations when one talks about things. Which one may not avoid in things where one has to understand one another before one embarks on an undertaking. Proudhon says, woman is the desolation of the righteous man. I think that one can feel and understand these words even if one has absolutely no pretensions to being ‘a righteous man’ or of passing oneself off as one. Although a minister in general, but more specifically Pa in particular, isn’t a woman, it seems to me that there’s something similarly inexpressibly desperate in his manner of speaking and acting at certain moments. A phenomenon that I’ve often tried to analyze but which remains a mystery to me, to which I can give no other or more correct definition than Hugo’s words, ‘he has the black ray’, or the words of someone else, ‘the most gentle of cruel men’. I say this to explain what I think, and to throw light on the question facing us. You will by now gradually begin to 
   understand that I’m usually calm on the inside. Well, but what to do? If it were possible it would be a very good thing if I got a studio at home. It worked very well for Rappard, and Rappard writes to me, ‘I regarded it as your greatest misfortune that you couldn’t be at home’. And that’s true, and I’ve felt it terribly, not only later but also at the time, 2 years ago now, when I had just been confronted by it. Pa didn’t do it on purpose. I say, Pa isn’t very sensitive, and Pa still has no idea at all, even now, although I’ve told him now for the very first time, that this has been a great difficulty for me. Pa still says — and this is something icy cold that frightens me when I think about it — Pa still says now, after two years, that he acted in the past according to his opinion and principles. A normal person, you or I, if we’d done something like that, we would, I believe, I hope, I trust, have regretted it long, long since, whether we were at fault or were right. Should you tell me that Pa doesn’t mean it so harshly, that may be so, but what someone means is one thing, and how it actually turns out is another. Pa’s opinions, however, are undoubtedly well-intentioned &c. &c. — but for my part I hope that His Hon. won’t adopt any new opinions like those. 
   I tell you here and now that for my part I agree with Rappard when he tells me — ‘stay at home for a long time’ — he insists on it. There are a mass of reasons for this — oh, Theo, if you saw everything that I see in it! How much certainty it would give us for the future! I hope that it’ll prove possible. There’s an eternal opposition in Pa between what he says and what he does, but it took me a long time before I knew that and understood that Pa himself is usually not aware of it, consequently one is often unable to decide to what extent he wanted to do what he actually did. I tell you frankly how I see it, brother. Pa doesn’t always know what he’s doing; even though he watches his words terribly systematically, his actions are very haphazard. And, in short, it will be hard to get something really good as the result of my visit here. The circumstances are such, though, that it’s actually urgently necessary to bring about an arrangement that is really kept to. I’ve suggested to Pa that the room that can best be spared should become a storeroom for the bits and pieces that I have and, possibly, a studio (in the event that not I alone but you and I think it desirable and necessary for me to work at home for a while, especially when there are financial reasons to compel us to it). Business is business, it’s clear enough to both you and me that this is a good move. I haven’t had this haven for far too long, and I believe that it must go ahead if we want to succeed in our plan. 
   I believe that it can be done, and I’ll dare to embark on it when you and I agree that we must put it into practice, and agree that you won’t hold it against me if, in the event of any discord with Pa, I don’t have to take it as seriously as I took it 2 years ago. I’ll quietly go my own way, follow your advice not to talk to Pa about various things — only provided that I find in you the person to whom I can talk about them and to whom I can say: I would find this and that all right for this and that reason. THEN I CAN leave Pa out of it, and not talk to Pa about the matters. The ice had to be broken, though, and I did that by coming to Nuenen, and on that occasion I had to have things out with Pa. I’m going to leave it at that, though. I can tell you now that I’ve managed to get Pa to agree that I can fix up a room here. If you approve, that will become my permanent storeroom, and my studio at times when we don’t have the money to be anywhere else. And I’ll talk to you first, not to Pa, about other changes or matters — and you and I together will get Pa to the point where it will eventually get better and better. I do think you’ll approve my having gone on immediately to bring about something permanent. I think the arrangement where I get a studio here is decidedly good in the circumstances (although I won’t always be in that studio). So let’s stand by that, and let this letter, and not my last, be our starting-point. Well, brother, I write to you about this one subject now, but your communications concerning what you think about affairs in Paris are very important to me. I’ll leave you to do what you want to do, even should you turn to painting, because in that latter case you would, in my view, LAND on your FEET. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   You can see how Pa is from what he followed up with, for instance, after saying that he can’t take back anything of what he did before, etc., which was enough, in other words, to create a fundamental irreconcilability. He immediately followed that up with, ‘but we don’t lack conciliation’. Conciliation with irreconcilability. This is certainly the ‘desolation of the righteous man’. In short, that is Pa — that is ‘a minister’. 
 0  Inexpressibly desperate for me to talk to him. If Pa weren’t my father I wouldn’t worry about it, but can one always act as if a father didn’t exist? I can’t do that either. But nor am I a man who takes kindly to ‘conciliation’ where I see a fundamental irreconcilability. 
 1  Every now and then, C.M. also used to come out with ‘unforgivable’. And people like Pa and C.M. stick to that, carry it through, year in, year out — save for ‘conciliation’. Bah — I think that’s really appalling. Approving of that, going along with it? No — I’d rather be soundly rebuked and I, for one, will say it to their faces. 
 2  You see how I am, brother, and you may make of it what you will, but don’t get the idea that I’ll enter into this sophistry of conciliation with irreconcilability. I want to be reconciled, effectively, conclusively, through and through, but otherwise rather an open parting, opposed to each other, in short, so that the world can see it too. Live life to the full6 is simply a duty — one mustn’t behave like the Jesuits and their kind. Vincent. The Hague. My dear Theo, I wanted to drop you a line to tell you that, as a result of the arrangement with Pa and Ma to let me use the room that has until now served as the mangle room as a studio and storeroom for the bits and pieces I have, I’ve come to The Hague to pack up and send my studies, prints, &c. &c. Which I need to attend to myself. I’ve also spent a day with Rappard, who was very cordial, and reassured me not a little concerning some scruples that I had about regarding it as something that might be of a permanent nature. Well, I saw drawings (watercolours) and painted studies by him that I consider very good. Particularly the old women’s home on Terschelling. What a change you would see in his work. Again — what I said about the Rappards — I do not mean by that that I’ve ever wished nor wish now that they should spend money on my studio at home. Not that — but that it should be in the simplest way 
   a room where I at least have a pied-à-terre, so that I can get through hard times more easily. There’s all the more reason to take careful steps, precisely because we’re poorer than the Rappards. Anyway, when time has passed it will, I think, be conducive to arriving at a solid result. I’ve seen the woman5 again, which I very much longed to do. I really do feel that it would be hard to begin again. But that doesn’t alter the fact that I don’t in any way want to act as if I didn’t know her or something. And I wished that at home they could realize that the bounds of compassion do not lie where the world draws them. You, after all, understood me in this. Given the circumstances, she has behaved bravely since then, a reason for me to forget the problems I had with her from time to time.
   And precisely because I can do almost nothing more for her now, I must at least try to put heart into her and fortify her. I see in her a woman, I see in her a mother, and I believe any man who is at all manly must protect such a one if there’s an opportunity to do something. I’ve never been ashamed of it, nor shall I be ashamed of it. Well, I write in haste. With a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. 

My address is


 
Kosthuis No 1


 
Assendelftstraat 16.


 But of course I won’t be here long. My dear Theo, I came back to Nuenen yesterday evening, and now I must get what I have to tell you off my chest straightaway. I packed up my tools, studies, &c. there and sent them here and, Pa and Ma having cleared out the little room, I’m already installed for the time being in this new workplace, where I hope I may be able to make some progress. Know also that I spoke to the woman and that it’s our decision, even more definitely, that she will stay by herself and I by myself in any event, so that the world can’t reasonably find fault. Now that we’ve parted we’ll remain parted, only looking back we regret that we didn’t choose a middle way instead, and even now there remains a mutual attachment that has roots or grounds that go too deep to be transitory. Now I have to tell you a few things that I won’t return to again after this — which you may take as you will — which you’re at liberty to reflect about or to dismiss — that’s not my business — you must decide that for yourself. Know, then, that I look back with deep regret on your visit this summer, on our conversations then, and on what arose out of them. Time has now passed over it, but I can’t deny, looking back, that it seems to me that we weren’t right. And now I regard your words and you yourself rather differently, and I can no longer think of you with exactly the same feeling as before. 
   For I now see more clearly how you and others appeared to wish that I should part from her. I don’t doubt the good intentions. It was up to me to decide and so, if I did wrong, I may not, in my view, blame you in the first place (in the first place I blame myself), but you in the second place. The levers that worked on me so that I was unsettled, and with which you were at least to some extent concerned — were, first, touching on an infinitely tender question from the past that troubled me, secondly your saying that ‘my duty’ would perhaps lead me to part. Well — if what you said had been entirely isolated — I wouldn’t even mention it — but it’s too much like the feelings of other people with whom I also differ for me to be able to regard your opinions as being entirely isolated. I accepted your point of view — although probably with intentions very different from what you imagine, and concerning which time will clear up one thing and another for you that now isn’t the time to discuss. You drew my attention to a case where it ‘had worked well’ that a certain man had left a certain woman. That may be true in itself — very true — but was it applicable here concerning her and me? You see, that’s something else. And I’ve taken the liberty of looking back over it to see ‘whether it had worked well’. And — my friend — that’s only too doubtful now. 
   Know that the woman has managed well, working (namely as a washerwoman)1 to keep herself and her children, consequently has done her duty, and that in great physical weakness. You know that I took her into the house with me because things happened during her confinement that made the doctors in Leiden say that she had to be somewhere quiet if she and her child were to pull through. There was anaemia and perhaps already the first signs of consumption, too. Well, as long as I was with her she didn’t get any worse, but stronger in many respects, so that various nasty symptoms didn’t recur. But now all that is worse again, and I fear very much for her well-being; and the poor baby, which I cared for as if it were my own, is no longer what it was either. Brother, I found her in great wretchedness and I’m very sad about it. I know that it’s more my own fault, of course, but you could have spoken differently too. Now, too late, I understand better that some of her fits of temper, and some things that I thought she did wrong deliberately, were also symptoms of nerves, and that she did them more unwittingly, as it were. As she said to me on more than one occasion later, ‘Sometimes I don’t know what I’m doing’. Both you and I have an excuse, in that it’s understandable that one sometimes doesn’t know how to deal with a woman like that, and then there were the financial difficulties — but still we should have chosen more of a middle way, and if we could still find it even now — although it will be difficult to find now — it would still be humane and less cruel. 
   I didn’t want to get her hopes up though, and I encouraged her and tried to comfort her and strengthen her on the path she is on now, alone, working for herself and her children. Yet my heart is strongly drawn to her with the same profound pity as in the past, pity that has always lived on in me during these last months, even with a separation. Well, our friendship, brother, has taken a heavy blow from this, and if you should say, we were certainly not mistaken, and if you should reveal yourself to me to be of exactly the same mind now as you were then — I would no longer be able to esteem you precisely as I did in the past. I respected you then precisely because, at a time when other people didn’t want to know me because I was with her, you helped me to keep her alive. I don’t say that no change or alteration was necessary, but — I think we (or rather I) went too far. Now that I have a studio here, perhaps more than one financial difficulty is less fatal. I end by saying, think about it if you will — but if, after what I’ve told you, your sentiments remain precisely the same as this summer, I can no longer have the same respect for you as I did before. Incidentally, I’ve also resolved not to say another word to you about a possible change in your circumstances or career. For I see as it were two natures in you, struggling with each other within you — a phenomenon that I also see in myself, but there are still, perhaps, a few questions fermenting in you that in your eyes have already been resolved for me because I’m 4 years older. Think about what I’ve said, that would be very good, although you can also dismiss it. But for my part I wanted to talk to you frankly about it, and can’t conceal my feelings from you. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   As to my view about how far one may go in a case where one concerns oneself with a poor, forsaken, sick creature, I’ve already told you on a previous occasion, and repeat, to INfinity. And on the other hand, our cruelty can be infinite too. My dear Theo, You must know that I mean what I say to you regarding the woman. You must know that all the disappointment that your visit this summer caused me — more than you know — in so far as it touched me personally, it isn’t something that I’ll attach much importance to — but the other thing — namely that I found her again in such a state that my heart melted in me — that — it will remain — something insurmountable between you and me — unless she is yet saved. You were careless with your words then — you didn’t consider what you were saying and evidently spoke without sufficient grounds — and I’ll tell you straight out what I think about that — that in common with Pa, who often acts thus, you are cruel in your worldly wisdom. Cruel, I repeat, because what is crueller than to deprive such an unfortunate, withered woman and her little child of support? Don’t think that you can fool yourself that it was nothing, or just my imagination; don’t think that it will help you to argue that this is just about one faded whore and her bastards. All the more reason for profound compassion, in my view. Which I indeed displayed. I have now realized that in all that time YOU never wrote a single word about her, and didn’t reply when I told you I’d heard from her. And I now realize several other things, and because I realize them now I no longer speak to you in the same tone as before. 
   I do know that you did it with good intentions under the circumstances — I do know how you try to keep the peace with everyone (which I believe can’t be done) — I do know that even in this case you’re probably not actually aware of having done something that wasn’t right — yet — brother — remaining good friends with the world and following our conscience cannot go together. You don’t give your conscience its due. I also know that not everyone in my case and circumstances would undertake to contradict you, but although not everyone would do that, I at least want to tell you that I do hold something against you in this matter, and that in general I warn you against your policy. Which I find TOO politic. For I foresee that later (perhaps much later) you’ll regret much of what you now take to be right. For the time being I don’t have to give you any reason why I think that, because you wouldn’t believe me. The time that I was parted from her has largely spoiled again what had been gained for her well-being, and this is making it more and more difficult now. Is there anything still to be done? — but in what way? This is truly not a question of money alone, for the poor woman also misses me as I was for her and her children, namely that I loved them, and still feel as much if not more for them now. 
   Be so good as to take back what you write in a certain letter ‘that I would do her and myself a disservice’; mindful of the service you did her and her children and me this summer, you’d best keep quiet about that! You presume moreover, in the letter in question, which contains the only reference to her that you’ve written since this summer — you presume that I would want to take ‘that person’, as you call her, to Drenthe with me. I couldn’t do that even if I wanted to, because I don’t have the money for it. As to the money — brother — you understand that I don’t take any pleasure in it any more, don’t you? You do understand that, don’t you? I did take pleasure in it because it meant not only my survival, but also that of those poor creatures. It’s a sad letter at the end of this year — sad for me to write, sad for you to receive (although you’re at liberty to dismiss it, decide that for yourself), but it’s worse for the poor woman. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent I’ve had news from her again, since I sent her to a doctor and have heard various details about it. 
   Further — brother — you know that my response was cool to the tidings that a calamity that threatened you has been averted, I have no other response in that regard than ‘too BAD for you — my friend’. Perhaps you’ll understand why one day. I don’t say that it wouldn’t have been a calamity, but  It seems to me that there are those moments in life when it’s better that the blow should fall, albeit it hard, than that one should be liable to be spared by the world. As to me, I’m bound to misfortune and failure, it’s damned hard sometimes, but there it is. I still don’t envy the so-called fortunate and eternally successful ones, since I see too much behind it. Take the Prisonnier by Gérôme — the man lying shackled is in a bad way to be sure, but in my view it’s better to be him than that other fellow who’s lording it over him and tormenting him. I say this to point out to you the extremes of circumstances. In no way do I, for example, confuse my own fate with more aggravated misery like that of the prisoner. Nevertheless, in our society one also sees a je ne sais quoi of what I refer to. And for myself I do not congratulate you that it may be expected that you’ll be able to keep in with certain authorities. It occurred to me that it wouldn’t be superfluous to declare myself to you. You can take it just exactly as you like. I don’t forget, either, that at the beginning you had compassion for the woman in question. But precisely because I myself was not and am not blind to her faults, but sought and seek her preservation despite them, I believe that you could have respected and better understood this feeling of mine — then you would also have been able to take my part more resolutely against anyone who knew less about it than you, and it wouldn’t have got to such a high pitch that I had to give it up. I’m warning you now, because perhaps it’s still not too late; if it gets any worse the time for warnings will be past. 
   If you need me to explain everything to you even more plainly, here you are. You say yourself that you wish I would leave the woman, yes, leave her completely. Very well, but I won’t or can’t do it, do you understand, my friend, and it would be treachery if I were to do such a thing — I’m thinking of old words from the Bible, ‘hide not thy face from thy neighbour’. Now I tell you outright, no Theo (if you choose to presume that I want to do this or that, think exactly what you like, I shall do what I shall do, D.V.). I know very well that this is a sore point that relates to the financial aspect. Not only in the sense you refer to in your letter, but in the first place in another. If I accept money from you and do something you declare yourself to be directly opposed to, that would be wrong. I’ve always talked openly to you about everything, and revealed myself just as I was, tried to be honest, but I haven’t acted without consulting you. Very well, should this stop and should we not know each other in our private lives any more, there would be something false about our position. And that I decline. I’ve spoken my mind about Pa, I’ve spoken my mind about you as far as this summer is concerned. Why? To convert you to my way of thinking? No, just because I would consider it treacherous of me if I were to keep such things to myself. I am simply not a traitor, and if I have something against someone, then I say so and I don’t fear the consequences, although they can be serious enough. 
   That’s simply the way I am — I clarify the position myself and say: hold on, because I think very differently from you about this and that, and I can’t associate with you with the old cordiality any more (I’m not saying that I don’t want to associate with Pa or you at all any more — I’m not such a zealot). But I feel it when something has been broken. And I say, what’s broken is broken. If I do this, at least I’ll regain my serenity, I would lose my serenity if I wasn’t frank enough. I dare to face the future provided — I don’t enter into things that I’d feel were dishonest. And if you want yet another reason, well here you are then. For the sake of putting the woman back on her feet, I would even sacrifice my own pride over this principle or that as far as taking money is concerned, and did this more than once for her sake and for the children, but if the woman were not there then I would be even prouder than ever. (I already told you that in The Hague in response to something about being good friends with H.G.T., when you said then, ‘yes, I thought as much’.) And now, in my view, the situation is such that I can do nothing for the woman in the circumstances if I have no support, from you for instance, and that consequently I think myself that it is not in my power to help her — at least not right away. So you have power over me — you, above all, in conjunction with many others, none of whom are able to agree with me. And yet you will not get me to renounce her — with all your financial power. And because I won’t give in on the issue of the woman and want to say that clearly, make it audible to even the deafest of ears, I declare in advance that I’ve decided to share with her that which is my property, and I don’t wish to accept any money from you except what I can regard as my property without second thoughts. Vincent    Know, in short, that I believe I’m allowed to do anything that doesn’t harm anyone else, and that freedom, to which not just I but, in my view, every human being has the full, self-evident right — that freedom, I say, I have a duty to uphold as being the only position that I have to uphold. I really do ask: will I harm someone with this or that before I act? But unless people really prove to me that I would harm someone with something that I do, I don’t have to refrain from doing it. 
           So, I who don’t coerce also don’t want to be coerced — I who respect others’ freedoms also insist on my own. And as for the woman and the children, she’s attached to me, and that even after the parting, and I to her. And now I should in some way undertake, tacitly or not tacitly, to abandon her? No, I won’t undertake any such thing. I’m not asking you to be responsible for any costs whatsoever; on the contrary, I tell you, you can reduce the money, stop it altogether, but she’ll have her share of what I have. True cowardice on my part, brother, would be to be ambiguous about this. If it had to come to it that I myself had nothing, very well — that would be the worst, and there would still perhaps be others besides you who would make my life possible, to some extent. And if not — well, then not. My dear Theo, I still have to thank you for your letter of 1 Jan. and the enclosure. As to being brotherly, it seems to me that this depends very much on whether or not people look at things with the same eyes — and I pointed this out — since it appears to me that our views will probably diverge considerably — if this isn’t already the case. If I had already seen a difference — (not just supposed) — I do so, I tell you again, because I won’t behave towards you other than as I am, and precisely because I don’t want to quarrel. In the long run, I would rather do without the support that I get through you, however great it may be, than continue with it on the condition that I work against what I believe in. All the more so because in later years, if we live to see them, you may perhaps not really carry on believing in what you now take to be certain. But that’s not the issue now. Regarding what you say, that I could become totally isolated — I don’t say that this couldn’t happen — I expect little else, and will be content enough if life remains tolerable, bearable for me. 
   I tell you, though, that I wouldn’t consider that as a fate that I deserve, for I believe, after all, that I haven’t done nor will do anything that means that I have forfeited or will forfeit my right to feel myself a human being among human beings. To a considerable extent, then, others could also be at fault here. Well, I try to look at myself as if I were somebody else, objectively in other words, so that I also try to see my own faults as well as what perhaps offsets them. And I know various stories of men who had to live in relatively great isolation — also just because neither one party nor the other found them precisely as they wanted them to be. Now there are two sorts of folk who get between the parties, namely those who don’t have a personal character, and secondly such whose character really is a character but, as I said, is nevertheless not what the one party or the other who have the say wants. Isolation is wretched enough, and a sort of prison. It is, however, perhaps not yet possible to say for certain to what extent I’ll go further into it. Which you don’t do anyway. 
   For myself, I usually find it more pleasant among the people who don’t even know the word in question, for example the peasants, the weavers &c., than in the more civilized world. That’s fortunate for me. So, for instance, I’ve been studying the weavers while I’ve been here. Do you know many drawings of weavers? I only very few. So far I’ve made 3 watercolours of them. These folk are difficult to draw because in the small rooms one can’t get far enough away to draw the loom. I think this is why attempts to do it usually fail. However, I’ve found a room here where there are two looms and where it can be done. Rappard painted a study of it in Drenthe, which I found beautiful. Very gloomy — for these weavers are very poor people. I’ve also made a drawing, although only an impression, of a timber sale. I wish you appreciated and understood that if I do indeed wish at times that you might have other ideas about certain questions than your present ones, I can’t let it go, because I believe you would be the better for it. And it isn’t because I want to make a proselyte for MY OPINIONS. I don’t believe that my opinions are any better than other people’s opinions. Yet I’m starting to believe more and more that there’s something compared to which all opinions, thus including mine, are as nothing. 
   Certain truths and facts, on which our opinions have little or no effect, and which I hope I don’t confuse with mine or others’ opinions, which would be a mistaken point of view. Just as weathercocks have no effect on the direction of the wind, so opinions have no effect on certain standard truths. The weathercocks don’t make the wind east or north, any more than any opinions whatsoever make the truth true. I don’t know whether you’ll understand me, but I was concerned to make it clear to you that, thinking as I think, I could hardly be angry with anyone merely for the sake of an opinion. Not counting my own opinions for much. But it’s a very different matter if I don’t like it when I see many people, rather recklessly in my view, living too far removed from what is true for everyone. In other words if I get angry, it might well be about something where having a high opinion of myself had absolutely nothing to do with it. There are things that are as old as mankind itself, and that won’t cease for the present. I know an old legend of, I don’t even know which people, which I like, which obviously certainly didn’t happen literally, but is nonetheless a symbol of a great deal. The story goes that humankind is descended from two brothers. These folk were allowed to choose what, of all things, they wanted to have. One chose the gold and the other chose the book. Everything went well for the first one, who had chosen the gold, but things went badly with the second. The legend — without exactly explaining why — relates how the man with the book 
   was banished to a cold and miserable land and isolated. But then in his misery he began to read that book, and he learned things from it. So that he was able to make life more bearable for himself, and invented different things to rescue himself from his difficulties. So that at last he acquired a certain control, although always by working and as if through a struggle. Then later, just as the one with the book became stronger, the first one weakened, and so he lived long enough to feel that gold isn’t the axis around which everything revolves. It’s only a legend, but all the same to me there’s something deep in it that I find true. ‘The book’, that isn’t only all books, or literature, it’s also conscience, reason — and it is art. ‘Gold’, that isn’t only money, but it’s an image of a lot of other things as well. Don’t think, though, that I want to force anything in this respect — these things have to reveal themselves. However, having a word about things isn’t the same as forcing them — there are times when keeping silent is almost the same as hypocrisy. I simply didn’t want that either. 
   And for the rest, however becoming isolated or not may turn out, I’ll try to steer it in such a way that I can go on working — and as far as my opinions are concerned — I sometimes think of what Taine said, ‘it seems to me that as far as it is personal to the worker, he may keep it to himself’. So it was probably something of a mistake on my part that I didn’t keep it to myself. Well. And you should know that I don’t want you to regard helping me as something that you reckon you’re obliged to do, for you weren’t so obliged in the past nor are you now — it has been something voluntary on your part, for which I for my part really do have an obligation to you and, as I already said, really will continue to feel. Wishing you success with your affairs, Yours truly, Vincent 
   I once read an interesting remark somewhere that people really do go on changing as they get older. In a biography of Corot I find the following about the influence he had on Français. It says, ‘at the age of thirty, Français did not know what a neutral tone was’. I mean, until late in life both in art and very certainly no less ‘as a human being’, until late in life one may have certain stiff, rigid, let’s say steely ways of doing things, both of observing and of working, and may yet come later in life to milder, to more intelligent, to more reasonable, to more humane views. Just want to point out that it’s perfectly possible that, both as a human being and as a workman, you could come to more nature, to more rest, to more ‘your own self’. Just want to point out that I don’t find you natural, the way you sometimes are nowadays, for example last summer in The Hague. This means nothing for the time being — and is in no way regarded by me as your fixed and irrevocable character or state of mind, but as a curious phenomenon. Which I observe with interest and reflection, precisely because I myself have also known moments of that state of mind, precisely at a time when I was close to a reversal in my own mind. Well. There’s something else I have to tell you about my talk with Pa. I told Pa that in my present state of mind and position I sometimes think about going back to the woman I lived with — yes, that I could go so far as to marry her. You should know, though — but Pa doesn’t need to know this — that up to now I still think as I did when I decided that it wouldn’t work and that nothing can come of living together again. I mentioned it to Pa in order to return to the question of the ‘paternal right’9 to prevent something of that nature, a question raised by Pa. I said in that regard that, firstly, should Pa ever oppose me in legal proceedings this would, in my view, be a very unwise thing.
   That, moreover, it would be necessary to use tricks and false testimony in such proceedings in order to give a semblance of justice to an impediment placed in the way of any marriage I might be contemplating. That should people ever stand in my way in such a case, I, for my part, would defend myself very calmly and collectedly, and would stand up for my rights and not give in.  Realizing as I did that it would be a case in which the judge himself would urge the necessity of an amicable settlement. This is how I talked to Pa about the question of marriage, taking the woman with whom I lived as an example of how it might turn out. However, you should know that on this point I see no reason to go back on the decision not to live with her again. Decision she herself knows too. A whole lot of things would have to happen before I changed my mind in that regard, and they’re out of the question now. So know what you have to know about this, but I spoke to Pa about it to make it plain that if I should ever want to do this, Pa wouldn’t be able to prevent it, since, whatever paternal rights there may be, I can see no provisions in the law that could apply to me to prevent me. Pa has already hinted at this so often, very vaguely but nonetheless very palpably, that for my part I simply came straight out and told him how absurd and crass I would find such an idea. I really do think sometimes that marriage would be a highly desirable thing for me, but nevertheless I don’t have specific plans in this respect, and certainly not as far as the woman I lived with is concerned. My dear Theo, I just received your letter. Perhaps because your letter crossed a missive of mine in the same tone as the one you replied to today, you’ll see that I’m speaking here in a mood other than the rashness you assume. Precisely because I calmly say what I say, albeit not in the tone that’s used every day (this is a serious matter), I can’t avail myself of your generosity in regarding it as having been spoken ‘in haste’. It is this very view of yours (that I must have spoken in haste and without reflection) that is proof enough for me that we’re now at a point where more words wouldn’t get us any further, and I think it right that we let this matter rest. You say you have to speak about the finances. So do I. Brother, know that I repeat what I said before, without change, about how you have helped me nobly — and that: money can be repaid, but not kindness such as yours. But — this is what I want, and what you would approve of my wanting. 
   I must take measures such that I have what I have. I mean that I can only accept that money that I can do with as I see fit without having to ask anyone’s opinion. I would rather have 100 francs a month and free use of it, than 200 francs and not entirely free use of it. If we were more of one mind in our views, I would consider an arrangement like the one agreed between you and me up till now to be far and away the best. But where there’s too much difference in views, where there’s too little understanding each other, an arrangement such as the one agreed between you and me isn’t viable or wise. Supposing that, after all, both your character and mine want to avoid disorder or commotions, then we’ll break it off quietly and calmly — but definitely in such a way that neither you nor I can be criticized for folly or rashness. 
   I would wish it to remain the usual until March. That will enable me to pay everything I have to pay, and to provide myself with a few things by way of materials. First order of business that has to be dealt with. The last year, namely ’83, was a hard, sad year for me, and the end particularly sad, bitter and bitter. Well, we won’t refer to that again. After March we are free on both sides. But if you could still give Pa some contribution for a while, because I don’t want to be too much of a burden, that would be wise and good in my view. But this must be between Pa and you. Then, if necessary, I’ll find something to do on the side. I don’t much care what, only not with you in the same trade. Only be aware that I definitely mean it, facing the fact that we evidently couldn’t remain sufficiently in agreement were we to go on any further, I’ll try not to 
   accept any more favours in the form of money from you, since they can’t leave me completely free in my approach to life. You’ll say that you leave me free — yes, but there’s still a certain awkwardness. And I would rather have less from someone else, if I am not, after all, free in things that touch no one other than me personally. You mustn’t take this to mean that I want nothing to do with you any more, the opposite is true — you’re a dealer. Very well, if I make something saleable in your view, I would even rather sell it to you than to someone else, but it must be an arrangement such that my position doesn’t become false as a result, so I really do want a sale in the literal sense. You can take this, too, just exactly as you like, I think that what I say is understandable. I thank you for your letter, I appreciate many things in it. Regards, and believe me Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Yesterday evening I received your letter and the 100 francs enclosed. I can tell you that I’m now at a point where I can cover my deficit of last year, having had fewer expenses because of my stay here. I point this out to you so that you can see from it how I dislike disorderliness in affairs as much as you do, and also insist on meeting my obligations to people. And am in no mood to be indifferent to affairs — — on the contrary — that I assure you. I’ll indeed really try to carry on with my work, and you mustn’t think that I’m any different from before as regards working every day here. All’s well that ends well, says the proverb. Now, as to qualms I wrote to you about, concerning continuing to accept money from you1 on the same footing, we can stop now at a moment when I can come away without a deficit; all the more reason that I cannot and will not do other than regard the way you’ve dealt with me financially as generous. And if I had a deficit at the end of the year, I also in no way pretend that this was your fault. I say, however, that I’m glad that now, at this moment, there’s nothing unpaid to suppliers. 
   I’ve honestly dealt with and paid suppliers of paint or whatever else. I owe a great debt to you, though, and I would make it worse and worse were I to continue on exactly the same footing. Now I have a proposal to make for the future. Let me send you my work and you take what you want from it, but I insist that I may consider the money I would receive from you after March as money I’ve earned. And I don’t mind at all if it’s not as much at first as I’ve been receiving up to now. For my part I say decidedly that, whatever you may think about what I’ve received from you so far, for myself I consider it as something that I’ll repay if possible. If things work out, I really will pay it off. There can be no question of that for the present, and so we won’t mention it. Towards March I’ll send you some watercolours from here. I’ll take them to somebody else if you don’t want them, but I’d rather do business with you. These watercolours will have errors, but still, I don’t think it’s foolish of me if I make a start on getting my work seen in order to send it into the world. 
  Rappard did the same at a certain point, and carried it through from the moment he started it. As for me, I do it rather reluctantly, but I must do it. And from March onwards I’ll start to send work here and there regularly. And to you first — but don’t consider yourself obliged to take something from me if you don’t really care for it yourself. I should think that this would mean that, however much our feelings may differ or come to differ, we wouldn’t even have to talk about it, much less quarrel. Which in my view one does have to do if one has a relationship with someone such as ours has been up to now.  I repeat, I’d have qualms about continuing on the same footing. But I’d very willingly continue relations with you in a somewhat altered manner. I’m not even saying that I want you to consider immediately that anything you might take from me is something that you’ll try to sell. If, for the time being, you take work from me not so much in your capacity as a dealer but more in your capacity of having it in your heart to do something precisely for people like me, who are just setting out, that’s enough for me. But after March I don’t want to take money from you, or at least absolutely as little as possible, for which I haven’t supplied specific work. 
   I couldn’t continue on the same footing with enthusiasm — but I’ll start on that other with enthusiasm the moment I believe that the former has to be cut off. If you don’t want to enter into that other proposal, then you must leave it. I do want to be free with you, but at the same time I want you to feel you’re equally free with me. If there’s something in my work that you like, it will give me great pleasure, and if you don’t like it and you would want to stay out of it, I can have nothing to say about it. Moreover, whatever differences in feelings there may be about this or that, something that I hope really will remain is that we’re brothers and will conduct ourselves as brothers. I also hope that you and Pa won’t oppose me if I don’t take any studio other than the little mangle room here for the time being. I’ll take another and no longer be in Pa’s house as soon as my work produces enough for me to pay for a house again myself. I don’t think there’s been a day since I’ve been here when I haven’t sat working with the weavers or peasants from morning till night. I’ll be very pleased if you approve of my proposal. Then, in my view, we’ll avoid extremes and steer a steady course. If you know of something better, I’d like to hear it. Regards, and I thank you for what you sent. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent    My dear brother, Something has happened to Ma. Ma hurt her leg getting out of the train. Pa says the doctor1 said it was definitely a fracture. And close to the pelvis, in the head of the femur. I was there when it was set, which went relatively well, so that I almost dare think that it’s more probably a dislocation. The doctor assures us that there’s no particular danger, but that given Ma’s age2 it will take a long time. I wanted to tell you right away how it was, believing that you would prefer it. But I give you my word that it’s no worse than I say. For the time being I’ll write to you every day. I’m writing to your rue de Laval address by the same post so that you’ll know as soon as possible, whether you’re at home or you’re in the office. I’ll write again tomorrow once the doctor has been. It’s a real disaster. I was painting at a peasant’s, and was sent for. Ma is resting quietly now. Adieu, old chap, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent       My dear brother, There’s something I have to tell you in a word or two. Ma hurt her leg getting out of the train — at Helmond1 — high up near the pelvis — in what’s called the head of the femur. I don’t know whether it’s definitely a fracture or just a dislocation of the head of the femur. The doctor2 came immediately, has set it, and has assured us that there’s no immediate danger, but that it will take a long time. I didn’t speak to the doctor myself, so I don’t know exactly what it is. I was there when it was set, but it went very easily, relatively speaking. I give you my word that things are no worse with Ma than I’m telling you, and that we’ll telegraph you should the doctor predict any danger. And I’ll send you word every day. When I asked what the doctor said, Pa said it’s definitely a fracture. So you know about it right away; I thought that better than to delay writing to you. I’ll write to you again tomorrow once the doctor has been. With a hearty handshake. Ever yours, Vincent    My dear Theo, As agreed, I’m writing to you again today, now that the doctor’s been back. The first night was very peaceful, and since a great deal depends on rest, the doctor was very pleased that Ma had been able to keep her leg completely still so that everything that had been set had stayed in its place. We asked again exactly what it was, and the thighbone definitely is broken just below the head of the femur. You know that I was just on the point of paying off one thing and another with that money you sent. Obviously I’ve now said that since there will be all sorts of extra expenditure for Pa — Pa must go ahead and use it, and the other things will just have to be deferred (and it was by chance that I hadn’t sent it off yet). It will certainly be a long time before Ma’s better. Pa will undoubtedly give you more details when he writes. With a handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Saturday morning Wanted to add here that last night was peaceful too, and that Ma slept quite a bit. She sends you her regards again. But there’s a lot that will have to be dealt with, brother, before everything’s all right again. Willemien is doing famously, and it’s fortunate that she’s at home. Lies is rather feeble — she felt very faint again yesterday. Theo, do think again hard about whether you might come up with an idea as to how I could earn some money one way or another. Money will be needed, and we should also look again at the possibility of doing something with my work. If only so that I myself can pay for the outgoings involved in the work, and you can use for Ma what you would otherwise give me. Pa will certainly have told you that the doctor said that at best it will be six months before she can walk. I already told you that I’m working on watercolours of the weavers here. I’ll try to get some finished. However, I can’t give all my time to them now, and have to be at home a lot — at least for the next few days. Well, I’ll send a postcard once the doctor has been again today. Regards. My dear Theo, So far things are still going relatively well with Ma, in so far as the leg is staying in position as it was set. But otherwise these are gloomy days. And I’m afraid that in the long run lying will become very much more difficult for Ma herself. We talked about it these last few days with reference to your letter, in which you say that you’re thinking of coming. It would certainly be a great joy for Ma to see you, but all the same, looked at from the other side it’s something we have to be careful about. And that’s the associated parting when you had to leave again. And then it could be that Ma might think, if you came, that it was a sign that she was in a bad way. Yet it’s certain that Ma would be very happy if you came. At each of his visits the doctor has said that it was going as well as it could, and I believe that once we’ve got through the first week without the leg coming out of position, this will be a big gain in itself. 
   I just write to you about your coming because, suppose you should do it, I would think it advisable that you did not come and surprise her, but wrote to Ma about it first. Should there unfortunately be any turn for the worse, we would of course telegraph, you can always depend on that. Of course, whether you come or not is a question that can absolutely only be decided by you. There’s no particular and immediate danger, but it’s impossible to foresee how things will go. Wil is bearing up admirably. Pa has certainly written to tell you all the particulars, and will write to you again soon. I can’t keep my mind on writing and I have little time for it, because when I’m not with Ma I’m at a weaver’s nearby, where I’m working on 2 painted studies. Write to me soon, with a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Do not regard this letter as if I said that I wouldn’t approve if you came — do with it as your feelings and the circumstances dictate — but I write about it as a precaution, so that if you do come, you mustn’t do it unexpectedly in my view, because it might be a shock to Ma, or the emotion of the later parting be too strong. My dear Theo, I was glad to get your letter today and the enclosure, and thank you very much for both. It seems to me that Ma’s recovery is proceeding very well so far, generally speaking. And that the longer it goes on, the less immediate danger there is, and the more it’s reduced to a question of time above all. Yet — Ma will certainly not be entirely the same once the fracture has healed. The effect on her, and perhaps as a result on Pa too, will in my view be to push them instantly a whole lot further into old age. I was glad to be at home in the circumstances, and the fact of the accident naturally having pushed some questions (on which I have a considerable difference of opinion with Pa and Ma) entirely into the background — it’s all going pretty well between us, and it may mean that I’ll stay more and longer in Nuenen than I originally imagined could be the case. To some extent it’s in the nature of things, after all, that it’s precisely at a later stage, when Ma will have to be moved more &c., that I’ll be able to lend a hand. Now that the consternation of the first few days has subsided a little, I can do my work quite regularly, in the circumstances. Every day I paint studies of the weavers here, which I think are better in technique than the painted studies from Drenthe that I sent you.
   I think those things of the looms with that quite complicated machinery, in the middle of which sits the little figure, will also lend themselves to pen drawings, and I’ll make some as a result of the tip you give me in your letter. Before the accident happened, my arrangement with Pa was that I would live here free of charge for a while, so as to get breathing space to settle some bills at the beginning of the year. And the money that you sent at New Year and about the middle of January was ready for that. Because I gave that to Pa when the accident happened, this time it’s those paint bills that are waiting their turn. The more so since Pa has just had a windfall of 100 guilders from Uncle Stricker, which I think very kind of Uncle S. So I have not profited financially from being here. And my plan is to press ahead vigorously with the work. In a year or so the 
   financial difficulties that Ma’s accident can’t fail to bring in its train will be more noticeable to Pa than now, I think. So in the meantime, let’s also try to do something with my work. After all, Pa and Ma personally are secure for their lives, Pa’s pension being equivalent to his current income. But brother, the poor sisters — without capital, at a time when there’s no great inclination in society to marry girls without money — for them life could well remain drab and sad, and their normal development thwarted. We don’t want to anticipate things, though. How lying still all the time will affect Ma’s constitution is difficult to tell in advance. All the precautions we can take to prevent bedsores are important, of course. We’ve made a sort of stretcher in order to be able to change Ma’s bedclothes when needed — although the less this happens the better for the time being. Lying quietly is number 1. Fortunately Ma’s mood is very equable and content, considering her difficult situation. And she amuses herself with trifles. I recently painted the little church with the hedge and the trees for her, something like this,  
   You will certainly find the fact that I love the countryside here very understandable. If you ever come I’ll take you into the weavers’ cottages sometime. The figures of the weavers and the women who wind the yarn will certainly strike you. The last study that I made is the figure of a man sitting in the loom on his own, the bust and the hands. I’m also painting a loom — of old oak gone greenish brown — with the date 1730 carved into it. Next to that loom, by a little window through which one can see a small green field, there’s a high chair, and the little child sits in it, watching the weaver’s shuttle fly back and forth for hours. I’ve tackled that affair just as it is in reality, the loom with the little weaver, the small window and that high chair in the wretched little room with the clay floor. If you would, write to me in rather greater detail about the Manet exhibition, tell me which of his paintings are to be seen. I’ve always found Manet’s work very original. Do you know Zola’s piece on Manet? I regret that I’ve only seen very few paintings by him. I would particularly like to see his female nudes. I don’t find it excessive that some people, Zola, for instance, idolize him, although for myself I really don’t think that he can be counted among the very best of this century. Still, it’s a talent that very certainly has its raison d’être, and that’s a great deal in itself. The piece that Zola wrote about him is in the volume ‘Mes haines’. For myself I can’t share the conclusions that Zola draws, as if Manet were a man who’s opening up a new future for modern ideas in art, as it were; to me Millet, not Manet, is that essential modern painter who opened the horizon to many. Regards, with a handshake in thought. Yours truly, Vincent Regards from all — do write to Ma a bit more often, the letters are such a diversion. My dear Theo, Today I sent a parcel to your address containing 3 small panels and 9 watercolours. Please let me know whether you’ve received it. If there’s anything in it you like, so much the better. Ma is going on much the same. Am still working on various weavers, which you’ll get later. Lies has left again, it’s a lot of hard work for Wil. Regards. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just a word to tell you that — partly in response to your letter in which you mentioned pen drawings — I have five weavers for you which I’ve made after my painted studies and are slightly different — and I think livelier — in execution than the pen drawings of mine you’ve seen so far. I’m working on them from early till late, for have also started more new watercolours of them as well as the painted studies and the pen drawings. I thought about you a lot these last few days, partly on account of a little book that originally came from you and that I borrowed from Lies — the poems of François Coppée. I knew only a very few by him, and they’d already struck me at the time. He’s one of the true artists — who put their heart and soul into it4 — evident from more than one painful confession. All the more an artist because he’s touched by so many very different things, and is capable of painting both a 3rd-class waiting room full of emigrants who spend the night there — everything drab and gloomy and melancholy — and yet in another mood draws a little marquise who dances a minuet, as elegant as a little figure by Watteau. That absorption in the moment — that being so wholly and utterly carried away and inspired by the surroundings in which one happens to be — what can one do about it? And even if one could resist it if one wanted to, what would be the point, why shouldn’t one give oneself over to that which is in front of one, as this, after all, is the surest way to create something?
   I was struck by the last one in the little book, entitled Désir dans le spleen, which I copy to remind you of it. Everything lives, everything loves! And I, sad and alone,  Stand like a dead tree against the vernal sky I can no longer love, I who have lived but thirty years, And have my mistress lately quit without regrets.  I am like a sick man, his thoughts grown dull And wearying of his stale, familiar room, His sole amusement, stupid and mechanical, To count inside his head his carpet’s flowers. Sometimes I wish my end were near,  And all these recollections — once so sweet, I thrust away, as from the portrait of an ancestor Whose gaze disturbs us, we turn away our eye. Even of that old love, that drew so many tears, No trace remains in this, my jaded heart. O, thou figure in my thoughts, veiled and dim,  Whom I may meet tomorrow, whom I know not yet, A courtesan, leaning at table ’mid the remnants of a meal, Or — a woman, sober-minded, eyes downcast and pale. Appear! — if yet this wretched heart, empty of desire, Its flame extinct, you can again ignite, Give me again the infinite within a woman’s glance And all of nature blooming in a kiss. Come! — As sailors on a foundering ship Throw — to win an hour’s respite — a treasure to the deep — Come! — I promise you all, heart and soul — blood and flesh,  All — for but a moment of faith — or yet of drunken rapture. and then this: Divine hope that two together come to form And two together share, The hope to love long, love always, love More dearly every day; Desire eternal — touching and chimerical, That lovers sigh — When — blissful moment — searching each other out, Their lips exchange a mutual breath. That vain, illusory desire, that cheating hope, Whereof we never spoke; It pains me to see we are afraid of it, Though it be in our souls. And when to your questioning I, your sweetheart, Murmur a soft response, The word is — evermore — Without my uttering it, And though its dear echo sounds within your heart, Your silence is the same When on your breast, languorous unto death, I swear I love you. What signifies the past — what of time to come? For what is best of all, Is to believe that it should never end, That hour’s illusion. And when I tell you, ‘Evermore!’ — do naught That might dispel that dream, And may your kiss on mine Press all the longer and more tenderly. and then this7 — Sorrow assuaged You whom I saw as like the blasted oak, I find you now a father, find you spouse; And yet to that brow that dreamed of death’s release, A pistol once was held. All that you cannot have forgotten quite; You knew how one suffers and despairs; You carried in your heart the viper vile  Of a great love lost, a great hope — crushed. Oblivion eluded you — you sought out  Tumults, orgy and its songs — fame and its jibes And the long roaring of the sea and of the wind. Who, then, unto your sorrow put a silent stop — O Lonesome one — ’twas but the rhythmic beat Marked by the cradle of a little child. and then this — A wound reopened O, my heart, are you then so craven and so weak? And would you be like a convict, dragging his ball and chain,  Who, though released, yet hobbles still? Be silent — well you know the sentence she has passed on you. I will no longer suffer, and thus I order you: If I should feel you swell once more and writhe, May I — with a stifled sob — crush you; And — no one shall know of it — and — to still my cries, They’ll see me — for that ghastly minute, Clench my teeth — just like a soldier during amputation. This is certainly poetry, and among the best — I find Désir dans le spleen, in particular so true, paints how, in those very souls who are wearied and those who almost fall, there arises at times that infinite renewal of desire, as if they had no past behind them — I thought of Rembrandt’s Jewish bride10 — and what Thoré says about it. Thoré (in his prime) and Theo Gautier12 and so many others — how much has changed since them — and how much duller it’s become. If one wants to preserve something of the fire in one, nowadays one must show it to others as little as possible. But anyway. Did you get the little consignment I sent last week? I have to keep the pen drawings for another week or so because I still need them to finish off other things that I started at the same time. But you’ll get them soon — but do please let me know whether the parcel arrived safely, and whether there were enough stamps on it. Because drawings possibly count as written matter and more has to be paid on them. Regards — I hope you’ll be able to do something with all of this. Yours truly, Vincent Pa already wrote to you about Ma a few days ago. All remained normal since, and the doctor said today he hadn’t dared hope at the beginning that it would have gone so well. Coppée is another one like Heine or Musset — I’ll copy out a few more. The first one14 It’s not that she was so beautiful, But we were both twenty, And that day, as I recall Was a spring morning. It’s not that she looked so serious, But here and now I swear That never have I dared do a more courageous thing Than when I told her that I loved her. It’s not that she had a tender heart,  But it was so delightful To talk to her, to listen to her speak, My eyes would fill with tears. It’s not that her soul was hard, But all the same, she left me (or perhaps, I left her)15  From then my sadness takes its date, And will continue, everlastingly. The lost dog. When we go home, at night, through empty city streets, And see upon the wet, green, greasy mud Long streaks of gaslight, more of them every day, Often a stray dog with matted coat, a dreadful, doleful sight, An old dog from hereabouts, which its master, penniless, Has thrown out with a kick — perhaps mourning it — Will stick its stubborn nose into your heels, And if you should turn back, give you a look, And what a look — long, fearful, all cajolery, A mistress’s, a poor man’s touching gaze, Yet hopeless, with that uncertain air belonging to A woman scorned and a poor man who feels his shame. And if you stop, he’ll stop with you, and Feebly wag his wet and drooping tail,  Timid, knowing his fate lies in your hands. He seems to say: ‘Come on — take me with you — please?’ We’re moved — and yet we don’t quite dare; We’re poor ourselves — and rabies is a fearful thing. And then — unkindly — making as if to raise Our stick — we tell the dog: ‘Go on, be off with you!’ And — all contrite — he goes to plead his cause elsewhere. This also applies to art. Ill-omened meeting! and what times are these,


These savage 
– Prussians 
 what they have done to us


 
– decent people
      – too well-fed people
      (something like that)


  That the poorest folk now cast their dogs aside,
  And when, distracted from the public show of grief, we must yet
  Pity these animals – who turn upon us their imploring gaze.

 To a Second lieutenant. You carry, my handsome officer, With perfect grace, Your sword with hilt of steel, But I think of our defeat. This pelisse of finest stuff Sets off your figure perfectly; You’re charming; but after all We lost the battle. We read your intrepidity In your black eyes under their slender brows. Nothing wrong with wearing fancy gloves — But, they took two provinces from us. At your age one’s always proud Of a little bit of braid; But — do you see — ’twas yesterday They maimed our motherland. Lieutenant, I do not know If of an evening, a finger to your brow, Holding book and compasses, You stay up late, beside the lamp. Are your men your children? Are you their leader and their father? I wish to believe that, and would fight off A doubt that fills me with despair. Stripes on your sleeve, on your way,  Is it of deliverance you think? — Young man, give me your hand, Let’s give a little shout — ‘Vive la France!’ A woman alone. I met her in a bourgeois drawing-room – Her gentle, timorous eyes, her banished angel’s brow, First drew me to her – and I was told She’d separated from a brutal spouse. Still she kept company with those old friends Whose home had known her as a growing child And who, despite the talk that makes folk take offence, Cared not a jot for all their cruel prejudice. But she knew well enough – sweet and resigned – That wider circles were all barred to her,  Ever expecting – quiet and calm – The word that snubs, the greeting that rebuffs. And so, on evenings when they neither dined nor danced, She’d come and broider there among them, by the hearth, And there it was (seeing her so fresh and young) I was amazed to see she wore a wedding ring. Stoical, accepting of her curious widowhood Without a backward thought; naively, too, To show she kept her faithful vows, Her hand retained enslavement’s evidence. Dark-haired and pale she was – twenty-five years old – Her long, proud hands were veined with blue And the long lashes fringing her chaste eyes Cast fluttering veils across her nut-brown gaze. No gem, no ribbon, not a hint of gaiety, Never the smallest flower inserted in the chestnut-coloured band, The little collar – white and demure – Stood out alone against her dress of mourning silk. Sewing there, unhurried, with an easy hand, Confident of shadow’s power to transform, She kept the darkest corner of the room; She scarcely spoke, and wished to be forgot. But when she answered with a casual word or two The humdrum questions that were put to her, Painful it was to hear that voice, Broken by suffering and made for tenderness. That pure, slow voice, weary from prayer, Once interrupted by a master’s powerful tones, And forced, perhaps, to cry aloud from fear and shame By insults, or an arm upraised. And when a little child went round the company Offering its forehead to receive a kiss, how ling’ringly, With what a keen and melancholy pang She placed her lips upon the flaxen head. But straight upon this all too cruel delight How quick she was to take her needle up again! And what a sudden blush spread o’er her cheek, Conscious of regrets made palpable. For I could see, kindly though we were, That she was pitied for her miserable choice; That this community, timid, respectable, Retained its fear – quite natural, I’d say. Clearly I observed her humble gaze Falter if it should meet a sparkling eye, How she avoided all the younger girls, And looked none but the old men in the face. Young man, who could love this unhappy one – Your paths will surely cross some day – Don’t look at her, say not a word to her, Don’t let her love you, that would be unspeakable! Look, I know the skill, the subtle wiles Of sophistry as well as you. I know its piercing eye, its voice that penetrates,  And how the blood will surge through your rebellious veins. I know that quite defenceless, she succumbs, I know she beats her breast before the Cross, That she’d adore you like a god, or like a son; I know your triumph is assured. Yes, I’m sure for you she’d sacrifice Her only treasure – honour, faithful, pure. And that you’d gladly live and die with her. That’s fine. But equally, I know ‘twould be the death of her. Sadly20 Obsessed by these words, widowhood and autumn, My reverie seeks no other to express This melancholy, vast and monotonous, That robs me of all hope and all desire to love. Ceaselessly it evokes a long, long avenue Of plane trees, immensely tall, half bare, In which a woman in deep mourning, veiled, Moves slowly forward on the pallid grass. Her long skirts leave behind a wake, Trailing and rustling in the fallen leaves; She follows with her gaze the passage of a cloud Before the wind, driving from the north, already cold. She thinks of him, now absent, who was wont to say: I love you! And under the wide low sky from which the light has gone, Sees that, with the last chrysanthemum, yesterday The last butterfly has also died. And so she walks across the faded grass, Weary of wishing, weary of submitting, And always in her path, the plane-tree leaves Fall with a sound as sad as sighs. — In vain — to chase away these gloomy images Do I call up my youth, and that splendid summer. I do not trust the sun, no more believe the roses, And go about, head lowered, like a haunted man. My heart’s so full of autumn and of widowhood That I forever dream, under a pure, clear sky — Of one in mourning — in a chill landscape, And the leaves falling at first winter’s wind. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter — Ma’s doing well — at the outset the doctor said it would be six months before the leg had healed — now he’s talking about a good 3 months1 — and he said to Ma — ‘but that’s your daughter’s fault, for I seldom, very seldom, see such good care as she gives’. What Wil does is exemplary, exemplary, I shan’t easily forget that. Almost everything has fallen on her shoulders from the outset, and she’s spared Ma a great deal of misery. To mention just one thing, it’s definitely her fault that Ma has so few bedsores (which started very badly at the beginning and had deteriorated). And I assure you that the chores she has to do aren’t always pleasant. Now listen — when I’d read your letter about the drawings, I immediately sent you a new watercolour of a weaver and five pen drawings. For my part, too, I’ll tell you frankly that I think that what you say is true, that my work will have to get much better, but at the same time also that your efforts to do something with it might also be a little more decisive. You have never yet sold a single thing of mine — not for a lot or a little — and IN FACT HAVEN’T TRIED TO YET. As you can see, I’m not getting angry about it — but — there’s no need to beat about the bush. 
   I certainly wouldn’t put up with it in the long run. For your part, you can also continue to speak frankly. As far as saleability and unsaleability are concerned, that’s an old file I don’t intend to blunt my teeth on. Well, you see that my answer is that I send some new ones — and I’ll very willingly go on doing so — Id like nothing better than that. Only you must be totally frank for once — which is what I’d prefer — as to whether you think you’ll bother yourself with them in the future, or whether your dignity won’t permit it. Leaving aside the past — I’m facing the future, and not counting what you think of them, I fully intend to try to do something with them. You recently told me yourself that you’re a dealer — very well — one doesn’t lapse into sentimentality with a dealer; one says, sir, if I give you drawings on commission, may I count on your showing them? The dealer has to decide for himself 
   whether he wants to say yes — no — or something in between. But the painter would be foolish to send them on commission if he could tell that the dealer considered his work to be something that shouldn’t see the light of day. Now, old chap — we both live in the real world — and precisely because we don’t want to put a spoke in each other’s wheels, we must speak candidly. If you say — I can’t be bothered with them — very well, I won’t get angry about it — but then I’m not obliged to believe that you’re an absolute oracle either, am I? You say: the public will be annoyed by this little spot and that, &c. &c. Now listen, that may be so, but this or that bothers you, the dealer, much more than the public in question, I’ve already remarked on that so often — and you start with that. I have to fight my way through, too, Theo, and with you I’m still at precisely, precisely the same level as a few years ago. What you say of my current work — ‘it is almost saleable but’ — is word for word the same as what you wrote to me when I sent you my first Brabant sketches from Etten. So I say — it’s an old file. 
   And my reasoning is that I foresee that you’ll always say the same thing — and that I, who until today have been consistently rather chary of making approaches to dealers, will now change tactics and become very assiduous in trying to sell my work. I do understand that you couldn’t care less about my doings. But if you couldn’t care less, for my part I always find it fairly wretched and rather dread things that will probably crop up — namely that people will ask me: what, don’t you do business with your brother or with Goupil? Well, then I’ll say — it’s beneath the dignity of those Messrs G&Cie, Van Gogh & Co. This will probably create a bad impression of me — which I’m quite prepared for — but which I foresee will consequently make me cooler and cooler towards you too. I’ve now painted the little old church6 and another new weaver. Are the studies from Drenthe really so very bad? I don’t feel inclined to send you the painted studies from here, no, let’s not start on that — you can see them if you come here sometime in the spring, perhaps. What you write about Marie is quite understandable — if a woman isn’t very milk and water I can very well imagine that she has little inclination to mope around with cantankerous fathers and pious sisters, at least a woman as much as a man would feel a fairly pressing temptation to end that stagnation, come what may. Stagnation that begins with a resignation that is perhaps fine in itself, but which alas one must come to regret, usually, when one feels one would eventually freeze. Read something by Daudet about pious women, ‘Those two faces looked at each other — they exchanged a spiteful, cold, closed look — what’s the matter with him/her? Always the same thing’. There you have it, that singular look of Pharisees and devout ladies. Yes, therefore we always lack — the same thing. 
   Yes — what am I supposed to think about what you say about my work? For example, I’ll now turn specifically to the studies from Drenthe — there are some among them that are very superficial, I said that myself — but what do I get served up for the ones that were simply painted quietly and calmly outdoors, trying to say nothing in them but what I saw? I get in return: aren’t you too preoccupied with Michel? (I’m talking here about the study of the little hut in the dark11 and about the largest of the sod huts, namely the one with the little green field in the foreground.)12 You would certainly say exactly the same thing about the little old churchyard. And yet, neither looking at the little churchyard nor at the sod huts did I think about Michel, I thought about the subject I was looking at. A subject indeed such that I believe, if Michel had passed by, it would have brought him to a halt and struck him. For my part, I certainly don’t put myself on a par with master Michel — but I definitely don’t therefore imitate Michel either. Well, I may perhaps try to sell something in Antwerp, and I’d like to put a couple of those selfsame Drenthe studies in black wooden frames — which I’m looking for at a carpenter’s here — I prefer to see my work in a deep black frame, and he makes them cheaply enough.
   You mustn’t take it amiss that I mention it, brother. I’m seeking something calm and something cool in my work. No more than I approve of its just lying about, do I want my work to be displayed in fluted frames in the leading galleries, you see.  And now it’s time to begin on that middle way, in my view, and I have to know fairly definitely how I stand with you, or rather I tell you that, although you’re still evading the issue in what you say, I believe that you will not in fact show it. And I don’t even believe that you’ll change your mind for the time being. Whether you’re right or wrong about this — I’m not going into that. You’ll tell me that I’ll be treated by other dealers exactly the same as by you, except that, although you can’t be bothered with my work, you furnish me with money anyway, and other dealers certainly won’t do that, and without money I’ll become completely stuck. I say in reply that things aren’t as clear-cut as that in real life, and that I’ll see how far I get living from day to day. 
   I told you beforehand that I wanted to settle these matters this month, and so it must be done. Well, because you probably plan to come as early as the spring I don’t insist that you make a final decision immediately, but realize that I can’t accept it as it is now — for myself, wherever I go and especially at home, too, I’m always being watched — what I do with my work, whether I get anything for it &c., in short in society almost everyone looks out for it all the time and wants to know all about it. And this is very understandable. Well, it’s very wretched for me always being in a false position. Come on — things can’t stay the same as they are now. Why not? Because they can’t. If I’m as cool as can be to Pa — to C.M. — why should I behave any differently towards you were I to observe in you precisely the same tactics of never speaking out. Do I consider myself better than Pa or you? Perhaps not, perhaps I divide things less and less into good and bad — but I do know that these tactics don’t befit a painter and that, as a painter, one must speak out and resolve certain things. 
   In short — I believe that a door should either be open or shut. Well, I think you do understand that a dealer cannot be neutral towards painters — that it makes exactly the same impression whether you say no with or without mincing your words, and that it may be even more infuriating when it’s said wrapped up in compliments. Now here’s something that you’ll perhaps understand later on better than you do now — I pity dealers when they get old — even if they’ve already made their piles — that doesn’t solve everything — at least not then. Everything has its price, and an ice-cold wilderness is what it often becomes for them then. Well — but you’ll perhaps think differently about it. And you’ll say that it’s also pretty sad when a painter dies miserably in a hospital and is buried with the whores in the common grave — where a lot of them lie, after all — particularly when one considers that dying may not be as difficult as living. Well, one can’t take it amiss that a dealer doesn’t always have the money to help, but one can, in my view, take it amiss if one notices that this respectable dealer or that speaks very cordially, but he’s ashamed of me in his heart and he completely ignores my work. So frankly, I won’t take it amiss if you say straight out that you don’t think my work is good enough or that there are, moreover, yet other reasons why you can’t be bothered with it, but if you leave it in a corner somewhere and you don’t show it, this isn’t kind if it’s accompanied by the assurance — WHICH IS NOT LIKELY — that you yourself see something in it. I don’t believe that — you mean practically none of it. And precisely because you say yourself that you know my work better than anyone else, I may assume that you must think very badly of it indeed if you don’t want to soil your hands with it. Why should I force myself on you? Well, regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Apart from a few years which I find hard to understand myself, when I was confused by religious ideas — by a sort of mysticism — leaving aside that period, I’ve always lived with a certain warmth. Now it’s all becoming bleaker and colder and duller around me. And when I tell you that in the first place I WILL not stand it like this, never mind whether or not I can, I refer to what I said right at the very beginning of our relationship. What I’ve had against you in the last year is a sort of relapse into cold decency, which I find sterile and of no use to one — diametrically opposed to everything that is action, especially to everything that is artistic. I say it as I see it, not to make you wretched but to get you to see and feel if possible the reason that I no longer think of you as a brother and friend with the same pleasure as before. There has to be more zest in my life if I want to get more brio into my brush — I won’t get a hair’s breadth further by exercising patience. If, for your part, you relapse into the above-mentioned, don’t then take it amiss if I’m not the same towards you as I was in the first year, say. About my drawings — at this moment it seems to me that the watercolours, the pen drawings of the weavers, the latest pen drawings I’m working on now, aren’t so dull on the whole that they’re nothing at all. But if I come to the conclusion: they’re no good, and Theo is right not to show them to anyone — then — then — it will  be all the more proof that I have good reason to dislike our present false position, and will try all the more to change, come what may — better or worse, but not the same.  Now if I saw that, if you didn’t think I’d improved enough, you did something about it to get me further along by introducing me to another capable painter, for instance, because Mauve has dropped out, or anyway something, some sign or other that proved to me that you really believed in my progress or promoted it. But no, there’s — yes, the money — but otherwise nothing except that ‘just keep on working’, ‘be patient’ — as cold, as dead, as arid and as insufferable, just as if, for instance, Pa said it. I can’t live on that — it’s too lonely, too cold, too empty and too lacklustre for me. I’m no better than anyone else, in so far as I have my needs and desires like everyone, and it’s very understandable that one reacts knowing for sure that one is really being kept dangling, in the dark. If one goes from bad to worse — this wouldn’t be impossible in my case — what would it matter? If one is badly off, one has to take a chance of making things better. Brother — I really must remind you of how I was at the very beginning of what we began. Right from the outset I’ve talked to you about the question of women. I still recall that I took you to the station in Roosendaal in the first year, and that I said to you then that I was so against being alone that I would rather be with a common whore than alone. Perhaps you remember that.
 1  I found the idea that our relationship might not last almost unbearable at first. And I so very much wished that it had been simple to change things. However I can’t always keep on fooling myself that this can be done against the grain. The depression about it has thus been one of the reasons I wrote to you so assertively from Drenthe, become a painter yet. Which cooled off immediately when I saw that your dissatisfaction about business matters vanished when you were on better terms with Goupil again. At first I thought it was only half sincere — then later, and now, still, I think it very understandable and think it more a mistake on my part that I wrote to you, become a painter, than on yours that you resumed your affairs with enthusiasm when they became more possible to resume and the machinations making it impossible for you ceased. What remains, though, is that I still feel depressed by the falseness of the position between us. At this moment it’s more important for me to sell for 5 guilders than to receive 10 guilders by way of patronage. Well, you repeatedly write, actually most definitely, that you haven’t made, aren’t making, nor believe for the present you’re able to make the least or slightest effort for my work; first, not as a dealer (I let that pass, and at least don’t take it amiss of you) but, secondly, not in private either (and that I do take somewhat amiss of you). 
 2  In this case I mustn’t sit doing nothing or be a funker, so straight out, if you do nothing with my work, I don’t want your patronage. I state the reason plainly and I’ll state it precisely the same way, when giving a reason for it is hard to avoid. So it isn’t that I want to ignore or belittle your help from the start until now. It’s a matter of my seeing more benefit in even the poorest, most wretched muddling along than in patronage (which it’s degenerating into). One can’t do without it at the very, very beginning, but now I must for God’s sake, God knows how, just start muddling along rather than acquiesce in something that would take us no further anyway. Brotherly or not brotherly, if you can do nothing other than absolutely the financial alone, you might as well keep that too. As it has been in the last year, I almost dare to say, it was confined solely to money. And although you say you give me a completely free hand, it seemed to me, at bottom, that if I do this or that with a woman, for instance, that you and others don’t approve of 
 3  (perhaps rightly disapprove of, but sometimes I don’t give a damn about that), there comes one of those little tugs on the purse-strings just to make me feel that it’s ‘in my interest’ to go along with your opinion. So you got your way regarding the woman, and it was finished, but — — — — — — what damn good is it to me to get a bit of money if it means I have to practise morality? Yet in itself I don’t think it something absurd in you when you disapproved this summer of my still wanting to go through with it. But I can foresee the following in the future: I’ll have another relationship in what you people call the lower orders — and again, if I still have a relationship with you, meet the same opposition. Opposition that you people could only carry through with any semblance of fairness if I received so much from you that I could do something different. Which you don’t give and can’t or won’t give, after all — neither you, nor Pa, nor C.M. or the rest, who are always first off the mark to disapprove of this or that — and which I don’t after all want from you either, since I don’t give much thought to the lower or upper orders. Do you see why it wasn’t an irresponsible action on my part, and wouldn’t be if I were to try it again? Because first I don’t have any pretension, don’t feel any desire at all, and secondly don’t receive the means from anyone whatsoever, or earn them, to keep up some sort of position or whatever you call it — I consider myself completely at liberty to consort with the so-called lower orders if the opportunity arises. 
 4  We’d perpetually return to the same questions. Just ask yourself now if I’m alone among those in the same profession who would most definitely turn down patronage if it entails obligations to maintain some sort of position while the money wasn’t enough to be able to do it, so that one gets into debt rather than make progress. If it could be done on the money, I might perhaps not refuse to bend, any more than others do. But we’re certainly not that far at present — I have a stretch of years in front of me, as you say yourself, when my work will have very little commercial value. Very well — THEN I WOULD RATHER FALL INTO THE HANDS OF MUDDLING ALONG and of living through hard times20 — which I’ve done more than once — than into the hands of Messrs Van Gogh. My only regret about arguing with Pa when I did is that I didn’t do it 10 years earlier. If you carry on in the footsteps of Pa &c. — you’ll just see how you’ll gradually get annoyed — and — how you would also become annoying to certain people. But those are awkward customers21 and, you’ll say — they’re of no consequence. My dear Theo, One of these days I’ll send you another new pen drawing of a weaver — larger than the 5 others. The loom viewed from the front — that will make this little series of drawings more complete. I think that they’ll look best if you mount them on grey Ingres. It would disappoint me a bit to get these little weavers back. And if nobody else you know wants to take them on, I’d think this is an article that perhaps you could take for yourself, in order to bring together a number of pen drawings of Brabant artisans, with this as the start. Which I’d be happy to undertake and — on the assumption that I’ll be in Brabant quite a lot now — would be very keen to do. On condition that we make them into a set that stays together, I’ll be happy to set the price low so that it can stay as a whole, even if many drawings of that kind were to come. 
   However, for my part I’ll go along with what you think best in this regard. And you see that it isn’t my endeavour to break off business with you — only, I’ve pointed out to you that it occurred to me that it might be useful to show the drawings as I send them. As regards what you wrote to me about Marie — I believe that in such a case, where one sees no possibility of carrying it through, there’s something one shouldn’t forget. Namely that if the woman has loved you and felt something for you, and you for her, this period of love is a stroke of luck in life. Whether the woman is beautiful or ugly, young or old, should she prove better or worse, only indirectly has anything to do with it. The plain fact remains that you have loved each other. On parting now — don’t extinguish that or try not to forget it — and the rock to avoid then is that of self-righteousness — one shouldn’t then let it appear as if the woman had a great obligation 
   to the man — one should part as if one had an obligation oneself — is in my view more chivalrous — and — more humane. This may be the way you see it too. Love always causes trouble, that’s true, but in its favour, it energizes. But anyway. As to myself, I believe — and consider it possible that to some extent it might also be the same with you — that I haven’t yet had enough experience with women. What we were taught about them in our youth is quite wrong, that’s certain — had nothing to do with real life at all. And if one has to see to it that one learns something by experience, it would be mightily pleasant if one was good and the world was good &c. — yes indeed — but it seems to me that one increasingly comes to realize that we ourselves are as bad as the world in general — of which we are a speck of dust — and the world as bad as we are — whether one does one’s very best or acts more indifferently, it always becomes something else — works out differently — from what one actually wanted. But whether it turns out better or worse, happier or unhappier, doing something is better than doing nothing. 
   Well, provided one takes care, as Uncle Vincent says — that one doesn’t grow up into a stiff, self-righteous stick — one may even be as good as one wishes. His Hon. taught this wise lesson to C.M.’s daughter. Well, regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Your letter about Millet has good passages — better observed than what you say about Lhermitte, for whom you can safely keep your sympathy, it seems to me. Don’t immerse yourself in that absolutely sterile carping about who’s the first, who the second &c., that’s nothing but nonsense and stupidity. There are enough who do that, and you, be one of those who think Millet very good and Lhermitte too, so that you leave no room to fret about who’s the best, the first — they’re both above the mark.  What would be the point of making comparisons between Rembrandt and Nicolaas Maes or Vermeer — nonsense, eh? — so stop it. There was also something I wanted to ask you about Millet. Do you think that Millet would have become Millet if he’d lived childless and without a wife? He found his inspiration the more easily and sympathized with the simple folk better and deeper because he himself lived like a labourer’s family — but with infinitely more feeling than an ordinary labourer. 
   Millet’s motto was: God blesses large families6 — and his life proves that he meant it. Would Millet have been able to do this without Sensier? Perhaps not. But why did Millet break with those men who were originally his friends and from whom he had an annuity? Sensier says enough about this to make out that the trouble was that they rated both Millet’s person and Millet’s work as mediocre, and plagued both themselves and Millet with it until that pitcher finally broke, having been too many times to the well. And yet Sensier doesn’t go into details about those days — just as if he understood that Millet himself found that time a dreadful bore and preferred not to think of it. Sensier says somewhere that when Millet thought about his first wife and the struggle of those days, he would clasp his head between his two hands with a gesture as if the great darkness and inexpressible melancholy of that period overwhelmed him again. His domestic life was more successful the second time — but he wasn’t with those original people any more. My dear Theo, Well — but that simply won’t do. What I get from your letter is this — you talk about a ‘flagging love’, and say that when you were faced with this question, you eventually broke it off. Well, at least this is something manly. Here we have a different case, though. I’m not faced with a flagging love so much — as with a flagging friendship — and very flagging. The friendship between you and me really has been mightily weak for the greater part of the last year. Shouldn’t we just apply that same system to it? One of the things (there are still more in that genre) about which I say ‘that simply won’t do’ is that now, when you send me money, you send me  1/3  and say, ‘I can actually send the rest too, but it suits me better to do it at the end of the month if it doesn’t inconvenience you’ — or something of the kind. So, do you still have to ask that, whether or not it’s convenient to me? You know yourself that last month I used at least 3/4 in one go to pay things off. But I didn’t complain about it, not even when it didn’t arrive until 10 days into March. But now, because I promised to pay various things off on 1 March that I owed when I came here, now having to wait till the end of the month again — whether that’s exactly a stroke of luck for me — you must just think about that for yourself. 
   Come on, brother — you’ll probably find it ‘not brotherly’ of me that I most definitely rank our friendship as it now stands under things without spirit — but in the past I would certainly have taken it very much to heart, this question of being brotherly or not brotherly. And now — I won’t take it to heart. And I don’t much care what you’ll think of me. For myself I know that, precisely because we started out as friends and with respect on both sides — for myself I know that I won’t tolerate its degenerating into patronage. I don’t choose to become your protégé, Theo. Why? Because. And this is what it’s threatening more and more to come down to. I think that what you say about my work is silly on two counts — I think it’s silly of you to give your opinion of how the Salon jury would judge my work when I’ve never uttered a syllable to you about sending anything to the Salon. I think it’s silly... well I think several other things are silly. And then, the other part is the little compliment in this form at the end: if I did this and did that, then I would be the person who would make you more reconciled to one thing and another. To what you say about not liking Lhermitte so much any more, I say that the fault lies with you. I think perhaps, as you do, that Millet ranks even higher, 
   but by Jove — if, as you do, one sees a lot by Lhermitte yet isn’t sufficiently carried away by it not to think of comparisons, in my view it betrays a certain small-mindedness. Which, for that matter, I’m afraid you’ll come to suffer from more and more. I never spoke to you about sending anything to the Salon, did I? — but I did speak to you about the people at the illustrated magazines — particularly Buhot, at the time. And I don’t take back that I encouraged you to do it. But it was probably too much trouble for you. Moreover — my friend — I wanted to repeat to you once more, but more clearly, what I also told you in a previous letter. If you were serious about wanting to do something with my drawings after a further period of work on my part, I would think it a good plan not to show them until we had some thoroughly good drawings. But that isn’t how you think about me, nor how you speak to other people about me, and you aren’t serious. On one condition, though — that in the meantime my life wasn’t too lonely and wretched, my position not too false, but I could resign myself to the present with a feeling of freedom — I wouldn’t even mind waiting a very long time before my work was shown. But how do things stand at present? You’re doing absolutely nothing to give me a bit of distraction, which I sometimes need so much, by meeting people and seeing things now and again. Anyway, I feel that nothing suits you better than simply not noticing me personally. It’s been like this for the best part of a year, and now the reaction is that I say: this way will lead to nothing whatsoever — neither for you nor for me, and it would be stupid to carry on in this way. Stupid. 
   When I read your recent letters, what I see from them is that you’re contriving to make it seem that the whole thing is my fault if we split up. That’s such a mean Van Goghish trick, such a bit of self-righteousness, that you can have with great pleasure if you’re attached to it. Pa would do the same — I know for myself how I’ve felt for the last year and what thoughts I have about our friendship. As it now is, intolerable. Be that as it may, whether I do well or ill by speaking as I speak, the risk is on my side, Theo; for you it’s easier to be rid of me altogether. For my part, if I break off our relationship, particularly in the financial sense, I will consequently have absolutely nothing else, and that’s the opposite of the usual tactics of Messrs van Gogh & Co. See in this — what you will. Conclusion — you say something to the effect that you would concern yourself with my drawings when they’re so good that you could put them alongside Millet and Daumier. For my part I believe that, of course, but at the same time I also know that in that case there are other people to whom I’ll be able to turn. And if you make it appear as if the house of G&C dealt chiefly in that sort of art, Millet and Daumier, I say to that that the house of G&C definitely did not concern itself with Millet at the time, before the big Millet sales6 — and just about as little with Daumier. In Daumier’s and Millet’s youth, G&Cie were very busy with Julien Brochart and Monsieur Paul Delaroche — to my mind not very much of a Monsieur, that Delaroche. So much for the house of G&Cie. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   I know in advance that I’ll be sorry, and even very sorry at times, if we split up. And perhaps — although there’s no inconvenience or worry associated with it for you — you for your part will also sometimes find it half-and-half less pleasant. But having called the thing by its name, flagging friendship, what else is there but separation? And to tell you the truth, I’ve already often thought that the situation between you and me would become intolerable unless I could renew some sort of relationship, albeit slight, with G&Cie — G&Cie to whom, after all, I’ve done nothing wrong other than working for them for 6 years to the best of my ability. Which is obviously a great crime on my part and quite enough to hate each other accordingly, eh? That’s business, after all. But you were too high and mighty to take the slightest notice not only of my work but also of everything else I’ve told you, namely that what happened to me in The Hague in the last few years could and ought to have been redressed at the time. 
   Speaking of brotherly, are these things part of brotherliness? And — how can I find something like you write: SO just have a little more patience, anything but insufferable? So there you have it, I need my patience for my work, my friend, and if I’m rather short-tempered with you and other people it’s because it’s cowardly to fob someone off with something like ‘so just have a little more patience’. Well, so I’m quarrelling with you — and high time too. In the beginning you showed drawings to Heyerdahl — to Buhot. Why not since then? Truly, I’m angry because you’ve been so lax since then, and that’s why I’m angry — it’s not about anything else — it’s because of that damned telling me each time ‘keep on working’, ‘have a little more patience’, and not lifting a finger to see to it that I get the slightest satisfaction from my work. 
   You must do exactly as you wish, but for my part I can’t swallow everything whole. The fact that you say in your letter something about G&Cie as specialists in Millet and Daumier is really going too far. Did you truly think I’m so stupid that I’d believe such bêtises? — Well, well. You could sometimes do with a stinging rebuke, you could, when you try  telling your fellow man such tall tales. In most cases, G&Cie were late with original artists — go on — I know who their protégés have been just as well as you must know. One of G&Cie’s best moves is that in recent years they’ve promoted various Dutchmen, Maris, Mauve, and that was more particularly on H.G.T.’s initiative. The fact that they have Breton is a relatively isolated case. But in Millet, Dupré, Corot, Daubigny’s own time, when they were young — come on — did G&Cie take much notice of them??? Now Breton, you know that, is rather different as a person from Millet and Corot — and I can understand that G&Cie ‘find him less disagreeable as a man’. 
  Daumier — particularly Daumier in his early days — when I think about that — and set it against the Guizot-ness of old man Goupil as he was then — — — — — — — — — — it does amuse me to think in terms of that contrast. It seems to me that G&Cie were rather orthodox and tended to look down on other houses as if they themselves were better than other dealers. Well they were, and still are, all tarred with the same brush. I believe that Millet and Daumier were pretty much ignored by all the dealers. ‘Excellence always escapes them,’ an art lover said about the way the dealers handled Corot’s studies. And that’s a shrewd remark — they’re usually generalities, their opinions — like those of Monnier’s Joseph Prudhomme. But philosophizing about this bores you — and me. Regards. I’ve just read Ma’s note. I’m pleased that you can tell from it that I speak less and less to them about what’s going on between us. I’m just saying that everything is all right until I tell them, equally briefly, that we’ve realized that our affairs are diverging quite considerably. That is so. You’re bound to G&Cie. G&Cie will certainly not do anything with me for years to come. In the meantime, I ask you, how can I resign myself to the prospect that you hold out to me of making absolutely no progress? My dear Theo, It surprised me a little that I haven’t heard from you. Because you write: ‘if it isn’t convenient for you to wait, write to me by return’. Very well, I wrote back to you that as far as being convenient to wait longer, it indeed certainly wasn’t — but I got a less direct response to that. This is precisely what my letter was about — that where our friendship was really beginning to flag in my view, this wasn’t stimulating &c., which I don’t need to repeat. Now this is most certainly not economizing, for time is money too, and when one even has to wait for paint, that is economizing at its most radical, even ABSURD, to my mind. But you should know this for yourself — my affairs aren’t yours, after all — and if you don’t understand it as a matter of course, why should I waste my patience and my time harping on about it? However, you can’t expect me to put up with more and more slackening as long as there’s a bit of spirit in me. 
   Go on and train yourself well in that system of prudence and respectability and suchlike, then you’ll go far, precisely in mediocrity — you understand — That leads to it, and directly. Not because I say so — but because it can be seen ten thousand times if one opens one’s eyes and takes the trouble just to look around. I hear that your friend Braat has fallen ill, though — (which I always thought he was anyway, the short time I knew him at all). Did it slip your mind because of that? Anyway, be that as it may, be so good as to answer my last letter and give me information about the extent to which you do or don’t want to change it in that way. Ma is making gradual progress. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   In normal good relations it would be utterly out of the question to stipulate that we shouldn’t interfere in each other’s private affairs, and if you had a speck of warmth for my work you wouldn’t totally neglect it. And I write as I write more to get you to feel a little how you’ve become cold to what we undertook together in good heart and how, moreover, too much coldly decent politics is creeping into your life than because I attach great value to whether an agreement is more or less fixed. The essence of the question is whether we understand each other or not — a matter of coldness or warmth towards each other. And I find what Zola says about dragging things on as true as you do — it extinguishes energy. Yet there remains something more to ask — what is the cause of this dragging on? For my part, I, who would rather be in the country than in a city, have absolutely no desire to break with you. But as things are going now, when I see that I still get nowhere with you even though I work day in and day out, I can’t stand it and see in it a neglect of my own affairs for which later, after all, I would be responsible. If you were prepared to see to it — and you most certainly have the opportunity — that 
   my work is seen by those who should become enthusiasts of it, if not now then in any event later — very well — then I can stop worrying about it and occupy myself solely with painting. Doing nothing with it like that, the way you do — is NEGLIGENCE. If you want to think this pedantic of me — that’s up to you — but I think you yourself rather pedantic here, where it isn’t appropriate. From the very circumstance that you don’t have the usual yet again this month — you might like to consider that we won’t cope by keeping up such appearances. Were it not the case that I feel more strongly by the day that I need something more, I would keep my studies quietly to myself. As Rappard does. But you say yourself that we’re not in Rappard’s position — and with all that I’m becoming more and more hard pressed. Today I brought home my 9th painted study of a weaver3 — painting costs money, and when I have to wait for paint, as I keep having to do, I waste time — and — come on — if you were a little enthusiastic about it, we’d have what’s needed. And what sort of an impression must it make, indirectly, on other people when you behave like this? It’s certainly hardly likely to create much confidence. My dear Theo, I just received your letter and the 250 francs enclosed. If I may regard your letter as a reply to my proposal, I would certainly be able to accept what you say. For my part I simply wish — in order to avoid correspondence, dispute — in order to be able to say something when one is railed at in daily life by one person or another as being ‘without means of support’ — that if I continue to receive the usual from you, I may regard it as money that I’ve earned. Naturally I’ll send you work every month. That work, as you say, is then your property — and I completely agree with you that in that case you have every right to do nothing with it — indeed, I wouldn’t even be in a position to object if you thought fit to tear it up. I for my part, needing money, am obliged to accept it even if someone says to me ‘I don’t want to do anything with this drawing of yours or burn it, you can have this much for it’ — in the circumstances I’d say — very well — give me the money — here you have my work — 
   I want to get on — in order to get on I must have money — I’m seeing to it that I get it — and so — if need be, even if I really didn’t give a damn about you, as long as I receive money from you each month that is useful and necessary to me (without conditions that I may not do this, that or the other), I won’t break the ties, and if need be I’ll put up with anything. This way of mine of regarding you and your money balances your way of regarding me and my work — and as long as it remains in balance — I’ll accept it. If I receive money from you, you drawings or paintings from me — and I have something to justify myself in the view of society and we otherwise have nothing in common with each other, if need be — don’t write or talk about anything — even then it’s enough for me for the moment and I accept it completely. Even if it pleases you to tear my work up or if you want to do nothing with it, or if you want to do something with it, I no longer have the right to criticize as soon as, for my part, I may regard it as a purchase. 
   Be so good as to tell me which term of abuse I used about your friend Braat in my letter. In my letter, as far as I know, there was nothing about Braat except that I thought he was already ill in the months that I knew him at G&Cie in Paris. At that time, as far as I can recall, I got on very well with him, and I really don’t understand how you get the idea that I ‘can’t stand’ him. So many years have passed, so much has changed for me in those years, that the people I knew then are fairly vague and indistinct in my memory and — that I seldom if ever think about them — which nobody can blame me for, I believe. But as to Braat, far from my not wanting to take any special notice of him, now that you’ve written about it that way, will you please assure him that my sympathies are with him, as they would be with any sufferer, and that, if he happens to remember me, I send my regards and wish him as much peace and serenity as one may have in such a situation. Yet what good does such a wish do him — not much — so, unless one is called upon to say something, one keeps such things to oneself. 
   I would ask you though, if you’ve said something to him about my having written about him in the way you reproach me with, to tell him that you had only seen that term of abuse in your imagination. For you definitely won’t find it in my letter. You write that you had tried to answer my letters, but had left off. For my part, too, I had wanted to write to you since then, but also left off. Know that if you don’t want to do anything with the work you buy from me, or tear it up if need be, this will be no reason for me not to do my best in it. For this month I have some pen drawings for you; in the first place the ones that are with Rappard at the moment — about which I have a letter from him that he thought they were all beautiful, and the sentiment in Behind the hedgerows5 and the Kingfisher6 particularly beautiful. Then those first 3 Winter gardens7 too, which he was also taken with. Aside from those, I have some painted studies that are your property — to do with just as you will — which I can send you if you wish — which, if you yourself don’t care to have them, I would ask you if I might keep for a while so as to work from them. One is a large weaver who is weaving a piece of red cloth8 — the little church amidst the wheat9 — a view of a little old village near here.
   I’d just like to come back to your letter about my drawings — the one you say I’ve interpreted utterly impossibly. I see in it first that, among the things you say, there are a few whose tenor is that there were things that pleased you in the tone, in the sentiment — so much the better — if you will, that gives me a good deal of pleasure. Second, in that letter there’s a comparison of the schools of Millet and Lhermitte. I found what you said about Millet better and more sensitive expressions than I am used to from you — this was overshadowed, however, by the way you were again tired of Lhermitte, and I’d also like to say about your whole argument once again, you’re splitting your hairs too thin — why didn’t you take a broader view, why didn’t you feel the same enthusiasm for both (who to my mind are to each other as Rembrandt is to Maes, say) without immersing yourself in barren hairsplitting about who is the greater? 
   Third, there was something that was not in that letter, namely an answer to the question as to whether we’d go on or not. That was the question that it was all about, and since my work depends on my paint and tools (to an extent that I can’t ignore), and they in turn on whether or not I receive money, I can’t possibly ascribe much usefulness to that letter. It would be less impossible for me to preserve my composure in our correspondence if, when you don’t have the money on the date, you were to write, I haven’t got it, you’ll get it at such and such a time. Now you wrote not a word in response to my saying: it surprises me that I hear nothing, my having said I’d rather have it at once than later, because you said that if I need it I can get the money by return. If you’d written again then, I’m sorry but I haven’t got it, I shouldn’t have had to get ideas into my head that you’re deliberately being lax in order to make my life a bit more difficult. And — when you haven’t got it, I can’t take it amiss — when you ignore — deliberately or not deliberately — that’s something that I really wish you could cure yourself of, and something about which one really has to get angry. What I said about doing something with my work, in Antwerp, for instance, definitely is my plan. 
   The frame of mind in which you now are about me, the frame of mind in which I now am about you, is cool enough simply to ask and to reply coolly. After all — leaving aside — giving a damn about each other or not — can I count on its being fixed for 1 year that I’ll continue to receive the usual monthly in return for supplying my work? Why I have to know this is because, if I can count on it, I would take a slightly roomier studio somewhere, which I need in order to be able to work with a model. The one I have at present has the following geographical location,  and my powers of imagination aren’t strong enough to think this an improvement on the situation last year. This doesn’t alter the fact that, if I complain about something, there appear in your letters such passages as: I (Theo) think that your position is better now than last summer. Really? And I also draw the little map in response to your expression ‘I’m not aware’ &c., and I would also not be content with this letter of yours if that wasn’t in it. 
   To which I say — I don’t care whether or not you’re aware that this or that isn’t quite in order, as long as you just don’t ask me to walk round befuddled about it, and as long as you give me the means to improve things I have no objection to your being ‘aware’ of all sorts of things. I hope this letter is as cool as yours — and I thank you very much for what you sent — which makes up for the rest — at least makes it such that, if I could count on its continuing thus for a year, I ask nothing more of you and will right gladly send you my work. And would just suggest one other small thing to you: that if I can sell something in Antwerp or somewhere, I notify you of it, and it’s deducted from the 150 francs. I don’t write to Rappard about business matters — at least I haven’t told him that latterly I haven’t been on terms with you as in the past. Just think about whether it’s quite in order that you, who know Rappard, have never seen anything of his work, have absolutely no idea what he’s doing — no longer take any notice whatsoever of him, except perhaps by hearsay from me. Yet he’s one of the people who will amount to something — with whom people will have to reckon — of whose work people will have to take notice. At the time Rappard came to you and felt small in your presence, you who knew so much about art. Since that year he was in Paris14 — how immensely he has progressed — but you — haven’t you rested on your laurels a bit??? My dear Theo, Because it’s possible that you didn’t properly understand what I asked you before, and so that there can’t be any question later of having misunderstood something or anything like that, I say it again. At the end of January or beginning of February I wrote to you that, on coming home, it became all too evident to me that the money which I usually received from you was regarded firstly as something PRECARIOUS, secondly as, yes, what I’ll call a gift of charity to a poor nincompoop. While I could observe that this opinion was even imparted to people who have absolutely nothing to do with it — for instance the respectable natives of these parts — and, for example, 3 times in one week I heard people who were then complete strangers to me ask, ‘why is it that you don’t sell?’ Just how pleasant everyday life is when one sees this all the time, I leave to you. In addition to this, I had already made up my mind this summer — on account of your letting me feel the reins then, that it was in my interests to go along with this and that2 — just to let you feel that, for my part, if you made it difficult for me by fiddling with those reins a lot, I would leave the reins in your hands
  but not be on the end of them myself — in other words — if I’m not at liberty in my private life, I decline this allowance from you. In short that my work (not my private life) should be what determined whether or not I stayed on my feet financially, at least as far as the 150 francs are concerned. Summing these things up, I said in a letter at the end of January that I didn’t want to keep it exactly as it was until today, namely without any specific agreement. That I would like, though — would even like very much — nothing better than that — to go on in the same way, provided there’s a specific agreement about supplying work. And that to try this out I would send one thing and another by March. Your answer was evasive, it certainly wasn’t something forthright like: Vincent, I appreciate all these complaints and I approve of us coming to an agreement that you will send me drawings monthly 
   which you can consider as the equivalent of the 150 francs that I usually send you, so that you can consider this money as money earned. I most certainly noticed that you simply did not write anything like the above. Well, I thought, I’ll send one thing and another by March anyway and see how it goes. I then sent 9 watercolours and 5 pen drawings, wrote to tell you that I had a 6th pen drawing as well, and the painted study of the old tower that you had especially wished for at one time. But now that I see that your expressions remain just as vague, I can do nothing other than say to you most decidedly that this is no way to behave. As far as my work is concerned, up to now it was indeed apparently the case that you would rather I didn’t send something than that I did. If that’s still the case — well, then in my view either I’m not worthy of your patronage or you think only too flippantly about my drawings. 
   I have still not withdrawn my proposal for a regular supply of work. When I speak of the fact that I want to be able to consider the 150 francs or whatever it may be, more or less as the equivalent of what I send you, in this respect it’s still a very private affair, and we leave aside altogether the question of whether or not my work has commercial value. But then I’m more justified in the view of Tom, Dick and Harry, whom I don’t have to anticipate accusing me of living off private means or — absolutely regarding me as ‘having NO means of support’. At the same time, it’s a sign of confidence in my future on your part, which I most certainly won’t try to force on you, though — and I tell you again that whatever you decide in this matter won’t change the past, and that I most certainly won’t ignore your help in the past and really will appreciate it. But you have to decide entirely of your own accord whether or not our relationship will endure in the future — for the current year, say. I end with the assurance, though, that if you refuse to enter into my proposal to supply you with work regularly (you can do whatever you like with that work as regards whether or not you deal in it, although I do in any event insist that you show it from time to time as you already did at the very outset, and rightly to my mind) then I would go ahead with a separation. It seems to me that honour is at stake — so either this change or — finished. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   What I prefer not to hear later would be that this or that agreement is more a notion of mine than the intention of the other side, namely yours. You know that you told me C.M. said something of the sort to you about me this summer. As a result I learned that it was important to dot the i’s and cross the t’s where agreements are concerned. I believe, because I already wrote to you repeatedly about this change, that by now summing it up once again, everything has been explained plainly and clearly enough, 
   and that for my part I may also ask for a plain yes or a plain no. 
   The reason I haven’t sent you the 6th pen drawing yet is because, just as I insist that you show my work now and then, I’ll also occasionally let Rappard see some of my things from now on, since he knows quite a few people — and that drawing was with R. at the time and I should have got it back, but he still has it along with two other ‘winter garden’ pen drawings.
   Well then, I’ve already dropped you a line about the painted study in a previous letter, that I was discouraged from sending it because if you don’t see anything in the ones from Drenthe I don’t think you’ll like this one either. It seems to me — as I recall — that among the ones from Drenthe there are some that I would do precisely the same way if I had to do them again. For the current month I already had the following drawings, Winter garden8 — Pollard birches9 — Avenue of poplars10 — the Kingfisher, which I would otherwise have sent you in April. My dear Theo, The drawings for this month are still with Rappard, otherwise I would have already sent them to you. And since there’s a plan for Rappard to come and stay here very soon, I’ve asked him to bring them with him then. I’m pleased that you wrote about Cor in that way, as I learned from your letter to Pa and Ma. Fortunate that Braat is getting better again — you’ll no doubt have seen — won’t you? — that you’d been fundamentally mistaken in what you felt you had to write to me about him. I hope you’ve realized this. I return briefly to what I wrote to you about Rappard. I don’t find it necessary to talk to him much about you as long as you and I aren’t on better terms than we are at present. However, just think again for a moment whether or not you’d be being unkind to him if you were to take no notice of him if he’s going to be here again soon. I don’t think you’d regret taking the hint I give you about this. What I’d like is simply for you to renew your acquaintance with him. 
   There’s all the more reason for it, particularly because he’s further on than I am. I say this simply to prevent you from being negligent. I don’t know what impression it would make on Rappard if I told him how things had been between us recently. But I know very well that he liked the work of mine that he’s seen these last few months. I would rather that I could tell him all was well between you and me. But I won’t harp on about this either. If you want to divide art with sharp, dead straight lines into things that one may bring into the open and things that one must persistently leave alone — that’s your business. And at this moment the whole question is so downright odious to me that I don’t want to pursue it any more. As far as Rappard is concerned, it’s curious what absurd things he sometimes hears about his work — which he takes very coolly. One has to be prepared for this and have a certain self-confidence in order not to allow oneself to be overwhelmed or upset. 
       Friends who make up for the unpleasantness about the work with warm-heartedness are of great value to a painter. Were you to feel personal sympathy for R.’s work, he’d certainly not be indifferent to you either. Yet he — and I too — increasingly cherish fewer and fewer illusions about encountering sympathy, and set ourselves more and more to carrying on without bothering about anyone at all. Ma’s condition is now such that there’s actually nothing more wrong with her than that she has to learn to walk again right from the beginning — and her leg should gradually get less stiff by exercising. And it could have turned out much worse. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent Something I wanted to ask you is why isn’t Cor going to Goupil, just as you and I started there when we were his age? I heard something about a plan to leave him at a Secondary School for another 2 years — I heard Pa suggest, in all seriousness, the bright idea of his becoming a ‘consul’. Although no one here at home, nor anyone with whom there has so far been any correspondence on this matter, actually knows what a consul actually does. I couldn’t care less about the business — I believe that this consulate is something like the way an old lady in the village here thinks that the military police are such handsome men to behold. 
   But it does surprise me greatly that I’ve simply never heard any talk about Goupil in regard to Cor. Why not? Particularly if you stay there, it seems to me, it’s obvious that Cor should go there too — later on you’d be company and support for each other — and in any event he’d be better off there, learn more, see more, than as a ‘consul’ or in a ‘notary’s office’ &c., or ‘the post office’, all highly respectable anyway, and much of a muchness. Cor himself, as far as I know, has no particular idea about wanting to enter this profession or that — because he’s probably seen little else at close quarters but books, the main road &c. He’s a nice boy now, it seems to me, but it’s time that he did something practical, it seems to me, otherwise they go to seed, these young fellows, particularly if they end up in a rather too empty little office — go to seed in pedantry and nonentity. My dear Theo, I send you herewith a croquis of a painting I’m working on with some others — this is an effect of trees in blossom in the late afternoon. There are 3 made of the same subject among the drawings that you’ll get as soon as Rappard gets here. What struck me in the scene was the astonishingly authentic and half old-fashioned, half rustic character of this garden. And the reason that I made no fewer than 3 pen drawings of the same little corner, as well as making several studies of it which I destroyed, was precisely because I wanted to convey this character in some intimate details that aren’t expressed easily or as a matter of course or by chance. If, for my part, I have any self-confidence in my work, it’s also because it costs me too much effort for me to believe that one can’t gain anything by it or does it in vain. And yet again, I shrug my shoulders at the commonplaces into which most connoisseurs increasingly seem to be lapsing. 
   Rappard had a couple of paintings that he saw a chance of finishing with a model that he could get, and has now written to me that he’s coming in May instead of right away, and might perhaps ask then if this visit could last a little longer if it were convenient here, because his plan is to make something else here. I wish his arrival might coincide with yours. You mustn’t, whatever you do, think that I have great expectations regarding the appreciation of my work — I believe one must be satisfied if one gets to the point where one can persuade a few people of the soundness of what one is striving for and is understood by them, without exaggerated praise. And the rest is a matter of, if something comes of it so much the better, but something that one should even think about as little as possible. But still I believe the work has to be seen, precisely because the few friends can settle out from the stream of passers-by. One doesn’t have to be guided by what the majority say or do, though. (Do you know that Aunt Bertha has been operated on for breast cancer?)3 Regards. Yours truly, Vincent  My dear Theo, Many happy returns of the day. It really was important news in your last letter — and I think you’ll be glad that the situation has at least become clearer. Am really looking forward to your next letter. As regards the work, I’m doing a fairly large painting of a weaver — the loom straight on from the front — the little figure a dark little silhouette against the white wall. And at the same time also the one I started in the winter, a loom on which a piece of red cloth is being woven — there the loom is seen from the side. I’ve also started on two others of effects on the heath.
   And a thing with Pollard birches. I’ll have a lot more hard graft on those looms — but in reality the things are such almighty beautiful affairs — all that old oak against a greyish wall — that I certainly believe it’s right that they should be painted. We must make sure that we get them so that the colour and tone match with other Dutch paintings, though. I hope to start on two more of weavers soon, where the figure will appear very differently, that’s to say where the weaver isn’t sitting behind it but is arranging the threads for the cloth. I’ve seen them weaving by lamplight in the evening, which creates very Rembrandtesque effects. Nowadays they have a sort of hanging lamp — but I’ve 
   just got a little lamp from a weaver  like the one in The evening by Millet, for instance. This is what they used to work by. I recently also saw coloured pieces woven in the evening — where I’ll take you sometime should you come here. When I saw it, they were also just arranging the threads, so dark, bowed figures against the light, which stood out against the colour of the piece. Great shadows cast on the white walls by the laths and beams of the loom. Regards — do write soon if you can. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve already left it too long before answering your last letter — and you’ll see how it came about. Let me start by saying that I thank you for your letter and for the enclosed 200 francs. And then I’ll tell you that today I’ve just about finished arranging a spacious new studio I’ve rented. Two rooms — one large and one small — en suite. I’ve been rather busy because of it this last fortnight. I believe I’ll be able to work a good deal more pleasantly there than in the little room at home. And hope that you’ll approve the step I’ve taken when you’ve seen it. By the way, of late I’ve continued working hard on the large Weaver2 — which I mentioned to you recently — and also started a canvas of the little tower you know. I think what you write about the Salon4 is very important. What you say about Puvis de Chavannes5 gives me very great pleasure that you see his work thus, and I’m in complete agreement with you in appreciating his talent. 
   And as regards the colourists — it’s after all the same with me as with you — I can immerse myself in a Puvis de Chavannes, and yet that doesn’t alter the fact that I should feel the same for Mauve’s landscape with cows and Israëls’s paintings as you feel for them. As regards my own colour, in the work I’m doing here you’ll find not silvery but rather brown tones (Bitumen, for instance, and Bistre)7 — which I don’t doubt some people would take amiss of me. But you’ll see for yourself what it’s like when you come. I’ve been so busy painting that recently I haven’t made a single drawing between times. I’ve heard from Rappard that he’s coming at the end of this week, which pleases me greatly. What’s more, I have the idea that this year he’ll come back again for a little longer. He’s bringing a number of drawings of mine, which I’ll then send you right away. Perhaps — in a while — I’ll agree with you that my position has improved because of the change last year, and that that change was good. 
   It will always be a sadness to me, though, that I had to give something up then that I’d have liked to pursue further at the time. Ma is doing very well, in my view — yesterday she came to my new studio in her bath chair. Walking is getting better, although old age considerably frustrates her progress, which continues regularly now, although not as fast as one might think could be the case. I’ve recently been getting on better with the people here than at the outset, which is worth a great deal to me, for one has a definite need to be able to give oneself a little distraction, and when one feels too lonely the work always suffers in consequence. One must, however, perhaps prepare oneself that these things won’t last for ever. But I’m in good heart — it seems to me that the people in Nuenen are generally better than those in Etten or Helvoirt — there’s more sincerity here — at least that’s my impression now that I’ve been here a while. 
   People do take a sanctimonious position in what they do — that’s true — but in such a way that for my part I have no scruples about going along with it a bit. And reality sometimes comes very close to the Brabant that one has dreamt. My original plan of settling in Brabant — which fell to pieces — I must confess is attracting me strongly again. Yet knowing how something like that can collapse, we have to see whether or not it would be an illusion. Anyway, I have enough to do for the time being. I now have the space again to be able to work with a model. And as to how long it will last, there’s no telling. Well, regards — the Salon will certainly give you plenty to do, but at the same time also be an interesting time. Thanks again for what you sent, which I really needed because of this change, by the way. I hope you’ll be able to agree with it when you see how I’ve fitted it out. Adieu, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent Regards from everyone at home, and they ask whether you won’t write to them sometime. Pa has been to Breda; Aunt Bertha was doing well and the dressing had been taken off. My dear Theo, Just wanted to tell you that Rappard has been here for 10 days or so, and sends you his regards. As you can imagine, we’ve made several trips together to the weavers and all sorts of fine things outdoors. He was very taken with the scenery here, which is also beginning to appeal to me more and more. Since he brought the pen drawings with him, I can send them to you now. Since I made them — even though that’s a relatively short time ago — I’ve got a little out of that way of doing it. I’ve done nothing but paint recently. And I’m curious as to whether you’ll see anything in it when you come. Last winter you wrote to me that you found passages here and there in my watercolours of that time which satisfied you more than before in terms of colour and tone. And then you said something 
   like ‘if you kept that up’. You’ll see that I’ll very definitely keep it up, and that what was in those watercolours has been strengthened quite a lot in what I’ve painted since. I’ve just now made a figure of a weaver standing in front of a loom, and one sees the machine behind him. And I’m working on a landscape of the pond at the bottom of our garden. Rappard has made a small weaver here, which I thought very good, and a bust of a girl winding yarn. While he was here I made another Weaver’s cottage by night, again in the style of those Drenthe huts. Rappard is going to make a large painting of the fish market in Utrecht, with many figures. I hope I’ll still be able to show you some things of his if you do come this summer. For he’s promised 
   to send me some of his work once in a while, as I’ll also send him mine, so that we can each have some idea of what the other is doing. I’m very pleased with the new studio; it’s roomier and good and dry. I hope to hear from you soon, I’ve had rather a lot of expenses because of the new studio. But of course it helps me a great deal that I don’t have to pay for my board, otherwise I would not be able to paint as much as I’ve been able to do recently. And I believe you’ll see, when you come, that because this is now more possible for me it has also helped me to progress. R. thought so, anyway, with whom I don’t want to change places at the moment where colour is concerned. Regards, write soon, and believe me, with a handshake Yours truly, Vincent  The Weaver drawing is the drawing of a machine after the painting I’m working on. As well as the machinery, though, it also has a little of the forces, and the light and shade of the loom &c. But please don’t think that this is the general effect in the painting. For the painting isn’t so dry. My dear Theo, I still often think about your pleasant visit, which I hope will presently be repeated for a rather longer time. Since you were here I’ve been working quite hard on a woman spinning, a little scratch of which I send you herewith. It’s quite large and painted in a dark tone, the figure is in blue, with a shawl that’s sort of mouse-coloured. I hope to make another one like it of a little old man at the bobbin winder near a little window; you might remember a small study of it. I would be very glad if you’d let me know the size of your frames soon, then I could make a start. If the size works out, I might make a small one of that woman spinning. I’ll just copy out a passage from Les artistes de mon temps by C. Blanc:4 About three months before the death of E. Delacroix, we met him in the Palais Royal galleries, at about ten o’clock in the evening, Paul Chenavard and I. It was as we were leaving a lavish dinner party at which questions of art had been debated, and the conversation had continued between the two of us on the same 
   subject, with the liveliness, the heat, that one devotes to futile discussions especially. We were talking about colour, and I said: ‘To my mind, the great colourists are those who don’t do local tones’ — and I was about to enlarge on my theme when we noticed Eugène Delacroix in the Rotunda gallery. He came over to us, exclaiming: I’m sure they’re talking painting! Indeed — I said to him — I was on the point of putting forward a proposition which is not, I believe, a paradox, and on which you’re in any case a better judge than anyone: I was saying that the great colourists don’t do local tones, and with you I have doubtless no need to go further. Eugène Delacroix took two steps backward, winking as was his wont: ‘That’s perfectly true — he said; look, there’s a tone, for example (he pointed to the dirty grey tone of the cobblestone); well, if one were to say to Paolo Veronese: paint me a nice blonde woman whose flesh should be of that tone — he’d paint her, and the woman would be a blonde in HIS painting.’  Speaking of ‘snot colours’, to my mind one shouldn’t consider the colours in a painting in isolation — if, for instance, a snot colour is placed against strong tones of brownish red, of dark blue or of olive green — it can express the very tender and fresh green of a meadow or a little wheatfield. And yet I believe that De Bock, who christened certain colours ‘snot colours’, certainly wouldn’t contradict the above, actually — for I myself once heard him say that in some paintings by Corot there are tones in evening skies, for instance, which are very luminous in the painting and are actually, regarded in themselves, a fairly dark, greyish tone. 
   Those at home will also write to you soon, and thank your for your letter. But to return for a moment to this question of being able to paint an evening sky or a blonde woman with a dirty colour like the grey of cobblestones; if one thinks about it, this question is actually a double one. For firstly one has a dark colour that can seem light. (or rather appear to be) 
This is actually more a question of tone. 
But then as far as the actual colour is concerned, a reddish grey, relatively little red, will appear more or less red depending on the colours that are next to it.
 And the same with blue, and the same with yellow likewise. One only has to add a very little bit of yellow to a colour to make it appear very yellow, if one puts that colour into or next to a violet or lilac tone.  I remember how someone tried to suggest a red roof on which the light was falling by means of vermilion and chromate etc. It didn’t work. Jaap Maris did it in many a watercolour by glazing a very little bit with red ochre over a colour that was reddish. And it suggested the sunlight on the red roofs perfectly. 
    If I have time I’ll copy something else out of that piece about Delacroix, about the laws that always apply to colours. I’ve sometimes thought that when people talk about colour they actually mean tone. And perhaps there are more tonists than colourists these days. This isn’t the same, although it can very easily go together. I do agree with you that these days one often finds it very hard to satisfy the need to talk to people who know how to give advice and from whom one learns and gets light — but without their playing the schoolmaster and at the same time without their just dishing up large, empty words that at bottom are either full of conversation killers or generalities. Anyway — nature is something that one can still learn a lot about, though. Regards — please don’t forget the rabbet size of your frames. Believe me Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I think I already told you in my last letter that I also wanted to start a large male figure as well as that woman spinning. I now send you a little scratch of it herewith. Perhaps you remember two studies of the same corner, which I already had in the studio when you were here. I read Les maîtres d’autrefois by Fromentin3 with great pleasure. And in different places in that book I again found the same questions dealt with that have preoccupied me very much recently, and about which I actually think continually, specifically since, at the end of my time in The Hague, I indirectly heard things that Israëls had said about starting in a low register and making colours that are still relatively dark appear light. In short, expressing light through opposition with dark. I already know what you say about ‘too black’, but at the same time I’m still not completely persuaded that, to mention just one thing, a grey sky always HAS to be painted in the local tone. Which Mauve does; but Ruisdael doesn’t do it, Dupré doesn’t do it. Corot and Daubigny??? Well, as it is with the landscape, so it is with the figure too — I mean, Israëls paints a white wall quite differently from Regnault or Fortuny.
   And consequently the figure looks quite different against it. When I hear you talk about a lot of new names, it’s not always possible for me to understand when I’ve seen absolutely nothing by them. And from what you said about ‘Impressionism’, I’ve grasped that it’s something different from what I thought it was, but it’s still not entirely clear to me what one should understand by it. But for my part, I find so tremendously much in Israëls, for instance, that I’m not particularly curious about or eager for something different or newer. Fromentin says of Ruisdael that people nowadays are much more advanced in technique than he was. They’re also more advanced than Cabat — who’s sometimes very like R. because of his dignified simplicity, for instance in the painting in the Luxembourg. But does this mean that what R., what Cabat said has become untrue or superfluous? No. The same with Israëls, too — with Degroux, too (Degroux was very simple). If one says what one says clearly, though, this isn’t enough, strictly speaking. And saying it with more charm might make it more pleasant to hear (which I don’t disparage, however), but it doesn’t make what is true very much more beautiful, since the truth is beautiful in itself.
    The measurement of the subject overleaf is about 105 x 95 cm, and that of the woman spinning 100 x 75. They’re painted in a tone of bistre and bitumen which, it seems to me, lends itself to expressing the WARM11 chiaroscuro of an airless, dusty interior. Artz would certainly think it too dirty. It has bothered me FOR A LONG TIME, Theo, that some of the painters nowadays are taking from us the bistre and the bitumen with which, after all, so many magnificent things were painted, which — properly used, make the coloration lush and tender and generous, and at the same time so dignified. And have such highly remarkable and individual qualities. At the same time, though, they require that one take the trouble to learn to use them, for one has to deal with them differently from the ordinary types of paint, and I consider it perfectly possible that many people are frightened off by the experiments that one has to do first, and that naturally don’t succeed on the first day that one starts to use them. It’s now something like a year ago since I started using them, specifically for interiors, but at first they really disappointed me, and yet I always remembered the beautiful things I’d seen in them. 
   You have a better opportunity than I do to hear about books on art. If you come across good works by people like, say, the book by Fromentin on the Dutch painters, or if you remember any from the past, be aware that I’d very much like you to buy a few sometime, provided they deal with technique — and deduct it from what you usually send. I do intend to learn the theory — I don’t regard it as useless at all, and believe that often what one feels or suspects instinctively leads to certainty and clarity if, in one’s search, one has some guide in truly practical words. Even if there’s just one or a very few things of that nature in a book, it’s sometimes worthwhile not just to read it but actually to buy it, particularly nowadays. And in the days of Thoré and Blanc there were people who wrote things that are now, unfortunately, already beginning to pass into oblivion. 
    To mention just one thing. Do you know what an unbroken tone and what a broken tone is? You can certainly see it in a painting, but do you also know how to explain what you see? What they mean by broken? One should know this sort of thing, theoretically too, be it as a practitioner when painting or as an expert talking about colour. Most people understand what they want to by it, and yet these words, for instance, have a VERY SPECIFIC meaning. The laws of colour13 are inexpressibly splendid precisely because they are not coincidences. Just as people nowadays no longer believe in random miracles, in a God who jumps capriciously and despotically from one thing to another, but are beginning to gain more respect and admiration for and belief in nature, just so and for the same reasons I believe that people should — I don’t say ignore — but thoroughly scrutinize, verify and — — very substantially alter the old-fashioned ideas of innate genius, inspiration &c. in art. 
   I don’t deny the existence of genius, though, nor even its innate nature. But I do deny the inferences of it, that theory and training are always useless by the very nature of the thing. I hope, or rather, I’ll try to do the same thing that I’ve now done in the little woman spinning and the old man winding yarn much better later on. Yet in these two studies from life I’ve been a bit more myself than I’ve succeeded in being in most other studies till now (barring a few of my drawings). As to black — as it happened I didn’t use it in these studies, since I needed a few stronger effects than black, among other things — — and indigo with terra sienna, Prussian blue with burnt sienna actually produce much deeper tones even than pure black. What I sometimes think when I hear people saying ‘there is no black in nature’ is — there doesn’t have to be any black in paint either. Don’t, whatever you do, get the mistaken idea that the colourists don’t use black, because it goes without saying that as soon as an element of blue, red or yellow is added to black, it becomes a grey, that is a dark red, yellow or blue grey. 
   Among other things I thought what C. Blanc says in Les artistes de mon temps about Velázquez’s technique was very interesting — that his shadows and half-tones usually consist of colourless cool greys of which black and a bit of white are the chief components15 — in which neutral, colourless parts the least little dash or hint of red, say, is immediately apparent. Well — regards, do write soon when you have something to write. It does surprise me rather that you don’t feel as much for Jules Dupré as I wish you did. I believe so firmly that if I were again to see what I’ve seen by him before, far from finding it less beautiful I would find it even more beautiful than I already did instinctively. Dupré is perhaps even more of a colourist than Corot and Daubigny, although they both are too, and Daubigny really is very daring in colours. But with Dupré there’s something of a magnificent symphony in the colour, carried through, intended, manly. I imagine Beethoven must be something like that. This symphony is surprisingly CALCULATED and yet simple and infinitely deep, like nature itself. That’s what I think about it — about Dupré. Well — adieu, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and 200 francs enclosed. Thanks for letting me know the size of the frame, for which I’m thinking of making a little woman spinning, after the large study. I was pleased to hear good reports about Breitner for once. As you know, the last impressions that I had of him were rather unfavourable as a consequence of 3 large canvases that I saw at his place and in which I literally saw nothing that one could locate either in reality or in an imaginary world. Still, a few watercolours he was working on at the time — horses in the dunes — were better, although very sketchy. And I saw in them things that mean I can readily understand that the painting you talk about is good. As to the drawing society:5 first, I’d utterly forgotten about it because I was painting those particular figures; secondly, now that your letter prompts me to think about it again, I have very little inclination for it since, as I already said to you in the summer, I wouldn’t expect anything other than a rejection of my application for membership, which rejection one can, however, regard as a sort of necessary evil that would be redressed another year, and as such the step acquires a raison d’être if need be. 
   But besides, since it completely slipped my mind, I don’t have a single watercolour in hand and would have to start new ones in a hurry, if it’s not already too late for this year. And when I tell you that I’m just now absorbed in two new large studies of weavers’ interiors, you’ll understand that I’m not in the mood for it. Particularly since it could involve all sorts of unpleasantnesses were I to apply again to the gentlemen in The Hague. As to these two weavers — one is a section of the loom with the figure and a little window. The other an interior with 3 little windows that look out on the yellowish foliage, which contrasts with the blue of the cloth that’s being woven on the loom and the weaver’s smock, which is another blue again. But for want of a good model I haven’t yet started on what has most struck me in nature these last few days. At present the half-ripe wheatfields have a dark, golden blond tone, ruddy or golden bronze. This is brought out to maximum effect by opposition with the broken cobalt tone of the sky. Imagine female figures against such a background, very crude, very energetic, faces and arms and feet bronzed by the sun, with dusty, coarse indigo clothes and black caps in the shape of a beret on their close-cropped hair — 
   while they go to their work on a dusty path of ruddy violet with some green weeds among the wheat, with hoes on their shoulders, or a loaf of rye bread under their arms, a pitcher or a copper coffee-pot. These last few days I’ve repeatedly seen that same subject, time and again, in all sorts of variants. And I assure you that it was thoroughly authentic, very lush and yet very sober, most perfectly artistic. And it preoccupies me greatly. The state of my paint bill is such, however, that I have to be a bit careful about starting new things in a larger size, and all the more so because it will cost me a fair amount in models if I could ever get suitable models of precisely the type I have in mind (coarse, flat faces with low foreheads and thick lips, not that sharp look, but full and Millet-like) and with those very clothes. For this is very precise work, and one isn’t at liberty to depart from the colours of the costume, since the effect lies in the analogy of the broken indigo tone and the broken cobalt tone, heightened by the mysterious elements of orange in the ruddy bronze of the wheat. It would be something that expresses Summer well — in my view summer isn’t easy to express. Usually, or often at least, a summery effect is either impossible or ugly  that’s my feeling, at least — it’s offset by the twilights, though. But I mean it isn’t easy to find the effect of a summer sun that’s as lush and as simple and as pleasant to look at as the characteristic effects of the other seasons. 
       The spring is tender green (young wheat) and pink (apple blossom)
    The autumn is the contrast of the yellow leaves against violet tones.
    The winter is the snow with the little black silhouettes.
 But if the summer is the opposition of blues against an element of orange in the golden bronze of the wheat, this way one could paint a painting in each of the contrasts of the complementary colours (red and green, blue and orange, yellow and violet, white and black) that really expressed the mood of the seasons. Well, I’m very eager to hear how things are going with your trip to London8 etc. Ma is still not making much progress with her walking. Wil’s gone to Noordwijk, and that’s a good thing. Lies has been here, but I thought that her work hadn’t progressed — she still hasn’t learnt to use her eyes and to make what she really saw or felt. It’s stuck at I don’t know what kind of hackneyed half-sentimental, half-religious view. But it can still change in time. Regards, and thanks again for your letter and the enclosure. Believe me Yours truly, Vincent The best I can think of — for the frame — is to take some little stretching frames of that size, then we can see what works out best. My dear Theo, I was delighted to learn from your letter to Pa and Ma that you plan to go to London on 4 Aug. and then to come on here from there. I’m again looking forward very much to your arrival and to finding out what you’ll think of the work that I’ve done since. The last things I did are a couple of rather large studies of ox-carts, a black ox2 and a red and white one. And have also been working again on the old tower in the fields in the evening; I’ve made a larger study of it than my previous ones — with the wheatfields around it. Rappard sent me back the little book by Vosmaer that belongs to you — I started to read it but — is it just me? — find it almighty boring and actually written in an academic, sermonizing tone. Perhaps you will too when you look at it again.
   Have you read Sapho by Daudet? It’s very beautiful, and so vigorous, and so close to life6 that the female figure lives, breathes, and one can hear, literally hear the voice, and forgets that one is reading. You’ll also see a couple more new weavers when you come. Nature is certainly pure here — I’m still very pleased with the studio, too.  We must visit some farms and weavers together when you come. Rappard’s plan is to come back again in October;9 he’s probably in Drenthe again now. Well, I write in some haste because I’m hard at work. I work a good deal early in the morning or in the evening, and then sometimes everything is so inexpressibly beautiful. Regards, believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just wanted to drop you a line while you’re in London. I thank you for your last letter and enclosed 150 francs. Would really like to go for a walk with you again there in London, preferably in real London weather, though, when the city has very melancholy aspects, particularly in certain old areas by the river — but at the same time has an extraordinarily poignant character. Which some present-day English artists have started to make, after having learned to see and paint from the French.  But, unfortunately, it’s difficult to see that part of English art that’s actually the most interesting to you and to me. The majority of the paintings in the exhibitions are usually not appealing. Yet I hope, though, that you’ll come across something here and there that will enable you to understand how I, for my part, always keep thinking about some English paintings — for instance, Chill October by Millais2 — for instance, the drawings by Fred Walker and Pinwell. Look out for the Hobbema in the National Gallery3 — you certainly won’t forget to look at a couple of very fine Constables there (Cornfield)4 and also in South Kensington (where that farm is, Valley farm). I’m very curious as to what will have struck you most and what you’ll have seen there. 
   Last week I was in the fields every day during the wheat harvest — of which I’ve made a composition.  I made this for someone in Eindhoven who wants to decorate a dining room. He wanted to do it with compositions of various saints. I suggested he consider whether 6 scenes from the peasant life of the Meijerij7 — at the same time symbolizing the 4 seasons — might not whet the appetites of the good folk who would have to sit at table there more than the above-mentioned mystical personages. Well, the man warmed to the idea after visiting the studio. But he wants to paint those panels himself, and will that work? (However, I was to design and paint the compositions on a reduced scale.) He’s a man I want to remain on good terms with if possible — a former goldsmith who has amassed and sold a very considerable collection of antiques no fewer than 3 times. Is now rich and has built a house that 
   he’s filled with antiques again, and furnished with some very fine oak chests &c. He decorates the ceilings and walls himself, and really well sometimes. But he specifically wants painting in the dining room, and has started painting 12 panels of flowers. That leaves 6 panels across the width, and for those I gave him provisional plans for sower9 — ploughman10 — shepherd11 — wheat harvest12 — potato harvest13 — ox-cart in the snow. But I don’t know whether it’ll come to anything — because I haven’t got a definite agreement from him. Only, he’s taken with this first panel as well as with my little sketches for the other subjects. I’m really looking forward to your arrival. I’m still pleased to be here — I miss some things from time to time, but the work absorbs me enough. Well — give my regards to Mr Obach if you run into him. When you come here you’ll find all the peasants busy ploughing — and sowing spurrey — or — it will just be coming to an end then. I’ve seen magnificent sunsets over the stubble fields. Goodbye for now. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Arriving home, you may have found another note1 from me. But while I asked you in it then to take back one thing and another that you said, I don’t ask it of you any more. Because even if you were to say that you’d started to think differently about it, I still wouldn’t be able to believe it, since I believe that you’re just definitely like that — and can’t easily retreat from it for the time being. We may perhaps talk about such issues very differently years from now, but probably not even then. For the time being, in my view, we certainly don’t have to revert to it. You would get back anything more than 100 francs that you might send next month, so send 100 francs (on which I’ll continue to rely for now, in accordance with our agreement), but no more.
   And it will be my endeavour to find something to replace that, too, and eventually I’ll succeed. Regards. Vincent Please don’t think that I don’t want to remain good friends — but here it’s in the nature of the thing that it’s not possible; even if one were to try it, it still wouldn’t work. Anyway, it’s a situation that no one could do much about. I believe that your character has now set in a permanent mould — mine too3 — and the directions do not run parallel. I actually don’t take anything particularly amiss of you — perhaps you don’t of me either — but to go on as if we were in accord we’d have to be people like Monnier’s Monsieur Joseph Prudhomme, and I at least refuse to be that, and I hope for your sake — you do too — and I’m not going to take it to heart any longer, either. My dear Theo, You’re quite right to ask why I haven’t replied to you yet. I did indeed receive your letter with 150 francs enclosed. I began a letter to you, chiefly to thank you because you seemed to have understood my letter, and also to tell you that I only count on 100 francs, but actually find it hard to manage on it as long as things don’t progress. But nevertheless, if it’s 150 francs, there’s a 50 francs windfall extra in so far as our very first agreement before The Hague was only 100 francs, and if we’re only half good friends I wouldn’t want to accept more. However, I couldn’t finish that letter, and since then I’ve wanted to write to you but I haven’t been able to find the right words. Something has happened, Theo, which most of the people here know or suspect nothing about — nor may ever know, so keep as silent as the grave about it — but which is terrible. To tell you everything I’d have to write a book — I can’t do that. Miss Begemann has taken poison4 — in a moment of despair, when she’d spoken to her family and people spoke ill of her and me, and she became so upset that she did it, in my view, in a moment of definite mania. Theo, I had already consulted a doctor once about certain symptoms she had. 3 days before I’d warned her brother5 in confidence that I was afraid she would have a nervous breakdown, and that to my 
   regret I had to state that I believed that the B. family had acted extremely imprudently by speaking to her as they did. Well, this didn’t help, to the extent that the people put me off for two years, and I most definitely wouldn’t accept this since I said, if there’s a question of marriage here it would have to be very soon or not at all. Well Theo, you’ve read Mme Bovary; do you remember the FIRST Mme Bovary, who died of a nervous fit? It was something like that here, but complicated here by taking poison. She had often said to me when we were taking a quiet walk or something, ‘I wish I could die now’ — I’d never paid attention to it. One morning, though, she fell to the ground. I still only thought it was a little weakness. But it got worse and worse. Cramps, she lost the power of speech and mumbled all sorts of only half-comprehensible things, collapsed with all sorts of convulsions, cramps etc. It was different from a nervous fit although it was very like one, and I was suddenly suspicious and said — have you taken something by any chance? She screamed ‘Yes!’ Well, I acted boldly. She wanted me to swear I’d never tell anyone about it — I said, fine, I’ll swear anything you want, but on 
   condition that you vomit that stuff up straightaway — stick your finger down your throat until you vomit, otherwise I’ll call the others. Anyway, you understand the rest. The vomiting only half worked and I went with her to her brother Louis, and told Louis, and got him to give her an emetic, and I went straight to Eindhoven, to Dr van de Loo. It was strychnine that she took, but the dose must have been too small, or she may have taken chloroform or laudanum with it to numb herself, which would actually be an antidote to strychnine. But, in short, she then quickly took the antidote that Van de Loo prescribed. No one knows except her herself, Louis B., you, Dr van de Loo and me — and she was rushed straight to a doctor in Utrecht, and it’s been put about that she’s on a trip for the firm, which she was about to embark on anyway. I believe it’s probable that she’ll make a full recovery, but in my view there will certainly be a long period of nervous trouble, and in what form this will manifest itself — more serious or less serious – is very much the question. But she’s in good hands now. Still, you’ll understand how depressed I am because of this event. 
   It was such a dreadful fright, old chap; we were alone in the field when I heard that. But fortunately at least the poison has worn off now. But what sort of a position is it, then, and what sort of a religion is it that these respectable people subscribe to? Oh, they’re simply absurd things and they make society into a sort of madhouse, into an upside-down, wrong world. Oh, that mysticism. You understand that in these last few days everything, everything passed through my mind, and I was absorbed in this sad story. Now she’s tried this and it has not succeeded, I think she’s had such a shock that she won’t lightly try for the second time — a failed suicide is the best remedy for suicide in the future. But if she has a nervous breakdown or brain fever or something, then — — — Still, everything’s gone fairly well with her these first few days — only I fear there’ll be repercussions. Theo — old chap — I’m so upset by it. Regards, do drop me a line, because I’m speaking to no one here. Adieu, Vincent Do you remember that first Mme Bovary? My dear Theo, I’m dropping you another line about it, to tell you that I do have hopes that the patient will get over it — although I do foresee that the consequences in the form of nervous problems could prove both serious and prolonged. Much — very much, depends on onlookers and family — who could actually do her no greater service than to treat her kindly as if nothing had happened or, if they can’t do that, just keep silent. I’ve had a long message from her today, and her brother1 tells me he’s heard too. There are dangers from two sides here, Theo — on the one hand that a nervous crisis develops and flares up as, say, a nervous breakdown or brain fever. On the other hand there’s a danger of melancholia or religious mania. Now, though, because the patient was treated immediately after the first symptom, while furthermore she’s in a setting that couldn’t be more suitable for bringing a person in her condition back to her senses — as a guest — in private — with a doctor she’s known for a long time, him and his wife — for these reasons there’s hope 
   that a crisis in one form or another can be forestalled or averted or neutralized by timely opposition — that it will blow over in the end, blow over in the form of continuing with this treatment for a while and then returning, calmed, to her normal life. You will understand that this greatly agitates me, though, this whole episode, when I tell you how, in the very letter I received today, she says ‘that no one in her family understands her real mental struggle, that she’s trying to distract herself but that she can’t, and most of the time sits in her room with a book or something or other that she has got from me’. I really don’t know how to deal with the B. family — they were very unkind to her at first — and even on the day she left by no means all of them were affectionate or even just good — although they didn’t actually know the truth. I then let her sisters2 know through her brother that I absolutely had to advise them to give their 
       sister satisfaction for unfounded mistrust and certain unfounded suspicions, expressing which was firstly premature, secondly wide of the mark, thirdly nails in the patient’s coffin. This worked in so far as in the first place her sister-in-law, Louis’ wife, and in the last place her sisters, have sent a letter to the patient, which was a good deal more sympathetic in tone and a good deal gentler and better than their first utterance. Louis B. himself, who’s the only one in the family who knows all the ins and outs of the poison — although others suspect — but are contradicted by me and by Louis — who know rather more — from the outset Louis B. himself has acted resolutely and sympathetically towards her. As for you, if anyone who suspects were ever to question you as to whether you know anything about an attempted suicide, just stay cool. But anyway, no one will, except possibly Pa or Ma sometime.
   You do understand that when I wrote to you that it reminded me of a passage from Mme Bovary — this has nothing to do with the second Mme B., whom the book is actually about — but only the first Mme Bovary, about whom there is virtually nothing except that one thing, how and why she died — upon hearing bad news about her fortune. here the cause of desperation wasn’t bad news about her fortune, but the way they accused her of being too old5 and that sort of thing. Anyway — in a relatively short time, in about a fortnight or 3 weeks, it will become clear whether or not a dangerous nervous disease will manifest itself. Regards, I’m still very upset by this. You’d better not mention it to Pa and Ma. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I wanted to drop you a line to say that I’ve been to Utrecht myself to see her. That I also had a talk with the doctor she’s staying with, specifically to get his advice as to what I should or shouldn’t do here in the interests of the patient’s health and future, either go on or withdraw. Wanting no other advice but a physician’s on this question. And I heard that the constitution is very shocked — although she’s getting better — that in fact — according to the doctor who’s known her since she was a child and was also her mother’s doctor2 — that in fact she has always had a very frail constitution3 and always will have, that for the time being, as things stand now, there are two dangers, that she’s too weak to marry, at least for now, and at the same time she can’t stand a parting either. That once some time has 
   passed, therefore, I’ll get a definite tip as to what’s best for her, to part or not to part. Obviously I’ll always remain friends with her in any case, perhaps we’re mutually too much attached. I spent almost the whole day with her then. I also dropped in on Rappard that day, but he wasn’t in town. This last week I’ve now also designed the last of the 6 canvases for Hermans, Wood gatherers in the snow. So that all 6 of them are now with him for copying — once he’s finished and they’ve become thoroughly dry in the meantime, I’m going to work on them again to work them up into paintings. I wish that you could see all 6 together in the panels they’re destined for. As far as drawing is concerned he copies very accurately, but to my mind his colour is poor, and as for mine, the warm grey, often bituminous tone I used throughout harmonizes with the woodwork and the style of the room. Regards, Yours truly, Vincent 
   You mustn’t believe what you once wrote to me, ‘that she must be an angel of patience’ &c. That really isn’t so, and the doctor asked me about it in particular — ‘she’s always had a highly irritable constitution,’ he said. I don’t consider it impossible that when, sooner or later, you put your theory of marriage into practice — namely when, having attained a good, solid position, you then propose to a girl — you’ll think of me now and then. It’s true that for my part I’ve now experienced great sadness in two cases, sadness of a very different character. So be it — but you’ll see that your own theory in this respect doesn’t always produce the results that one would say it promises to produce. Once you’ve attained a position and can maintain a certain status, then you’ll find wife and children and domestic happiness. 
   This is a fine promise that society makes, but does it also keep that promise? Society leaves everyone and all ways of doing things relatively disappointed. I say this in all mildness and not as a reproach, not in the least or slightest as such. I often think that there’s good in every energetic movement. Theo, now that I know more than I did at first about what made her so desperate, do you know what it was? Her family spoke to her in pretty much the same tone as you to me — that evening. Well, I was furious with you (then, that’s passed now), and she would also have taken umbrage at it if she’d had my constitution. Well, things like that (not that you said, of course, but that her sisters said) made her so desperate and distressed that she did what I told you. Seeing it from your point of view, I, who can reflect more, can say, at least when I think it over, well he thinks this, let him think it. But she, when they reproached her, indeed believed that she had done something terrible. And, without having done anything that she shouldn’t have done, she took it so to heart that she felt forsaken by everything and everyone. She’s still very worked up against her sisters, although she’s calming down, and in fact those sisters of hers have also taken a lot back. One keeps grumbling, though, and she’s already accosted me, but I really gave her back as good as I got. 
    I find it damned touching that this woman says in a sort of triumph, while she was so weak, after all (and defeated by 5 or 6 other women)8 that she took poison, as if she’d gained a victory and as if she’d found peace — ‘still, at last I have loved’. She always skirted around that in the past. For myself, these days I sometimes suffer distress that makes me ill, that won’t be distracted or numbed, but anyway. I’ve always, very far-sightedly, respected her concerning a certain point that would have ruined her socially, although if I’d wanted to, I had her in my power; so that socially she will definitely maintain her position and, if she were to realize it, has a splendid chance to obtain satisfaction from those women who defeated her, and to take her revenge. And I’ll help her to do so — but she doesn’t always understand, or not until too late. Anyway. It’s a pity that I didn’t meet her earlier — say 10 years ago or so. Now she gives me the impression of a Cremona violin9 that’s been spoiled in the past by bad bunglers of restorers. And in the condition in which I met her, it seems to me, a good deal too much had been bungled. But originally it was a rare example of great value. And she still has much value even so.
   I saw — that’s the only thing I ever saw of her again — a portrait of Kee Vos, taken a year later10 — was she diminished in it? No, more interesting. That disturbing the peace of a woman, in the way that the theological people say (sometimes theologians without knowing it, who think that they are not theologians), is sometimes a breaking of stagnation or melancholy that comes over many people and is worse than death itself. There are people who think it terrible to hurl them back into life, into feeling again, and one must weigh up carefully how far one may go. But if one does it out of a principle other than selfishness — well — then the women themselves can sometimes become furious and may even hate instead of love; so be it. Yet they won’t readily despise the man who did it. And they do despise the men who have extinguished the manliness in themselves. Well, these are deep things of life. But Mouret calls anyone who doesn’t think about it or mocks it ‘dupe’ and in his anger even — ‘fool’. My dear Theo, I couldn’t get my last letter into a different form. But understand that it always seems to me that it’s more an ill-fated quarrel between you and me than one for which we ourselves are solely to blame. And the same with Pa too. You say there’s soon to be an exhibition of Delacroix’s work. Very well — you’ll certainly see a painting there, The barricade, that I only know from biographies of Delacroix. I think it was painted in 1848. You also know a lithograph by De Lemud, I think — if not by him then by Daumier, also depicting the barricade of 1848. I wish that you could just imagine that you and I had lived in that year, 1848 — or a similar period, for there was also something of the kind with Napoleon’s coup d’état. I won’t say anything nasty to you — that’s never been the aim — I’m trying to make clear to you the extent to which the difference that has come between us is related to general tendencies in society, and as such is something very different from expressly intended nastiness. 
   So take the 1848 period. Who were facing each other then whom one can take as prototypes of all the rest? Guizot — Louis-Philippe’s minister on one side, Michelet and Quinet with the students on the other side. I’ll start with Guizot and Louis-Philippe. Were they bad or tyrannical? Not exactly — they were people, as I see it, like, say, Pa and Grandfather, old Goupil8 (people in short who look almighty respectable — profound — serious — yet if one looks at them a bit sharply and at close quarters, there’s something lugubrious, dull, even feeble about them, to such a degree that they make one sick. Is this going too far???), aside from a difference in position, same mind, same character. Have I got this wrong??? Quinet now, say, or Michelet or V. Hugo (later), was the difference between them and their opponents almighty great? Yes — but on the surface one wouldn’t have said so. At the time I myself, at one and the same time, found a book by Guizot and a book by Michelet equally good. Yet in my case, as I got deeper into it, I saw a difference and, what’s more, contradiction! In short, that the one peters out, disappears vaguely, while in contrast something infinite remains in the other. 
   Much has happened since then. But I believe that if you and I had lived then, you would have been on Guizot’s side and I on Michelet’s side. And both remaining consistent, could with a certain sadness have found ourselves directly opposed to each other as enemies, on just such a barricade, say; you in front of it as a soldier of the government, I behind it as a revolutionary or rebel. Now in 1884 — by chance the figures are exactly the same, just reversed — we’re facing each other again — although there are no barricades now, it’s true. The minds that can’t agree, however, are real. The mill is there no longer, but the wind’s still there. And we are — in my view — opposite each other in different camps — it can’t be helped. And whether you like it or not, you must go on, I must go on. Yet because we’re brothers, let’s stop short of shooting each other dead, say (figuratively speaking). 
   Yet we can’t help each other as much as two people standing side by side in the same camp. No, if we come in each other’s vicinity, we’d walk into each other’s fire. My nasty remarks are bullets directed not at you — who are my brother — but in general at the party to which you belong. Likewise I don’t regard your nasty remarks as being expressly aimed at me, but — you’re shooting at the barricade (and believe that you’re thereby making yourself useful) and I happen to be inside it.  Think about this if you will — for I don’t believe that you can contradict very much of it; all I can say is that I believe this is pretty much how it is. I’ve now realized that while I used to hope that you’d turn out differently and we’d be on the same side, it has been decided that we’ve ended up in opposing camps. And you — for your part, perhaps hoped that I’d change to the extent that we’d have fetched up together on the side where you are now. But you see I have no intention of that. I have to shoot in your direction — I’ll try not to hit you, though. You have to shoot in my direction — do the same. I hope you’ll take what I’m saying in a figurative sense. Neither you nor I concern ourselves with politics, but we do live in the world, in society, and ranks of people do form groups as a matter of course. Can the clouds themselves do very much about whether they belong to one thunderstorm or the other? Whether they are carriers of positive or negative electricity? But it’s also true that people aren’t clouds. As an individual one is part of the whole that makes up humanity. Within this humanity there are parties. To what extent is it free will, to what extent the fatefulness of circumstances, that one belongs to one opposing party or the other? Anyway, it was 48 then, it’s 84 now. The mill is there no longer, the wind is still there. However, try to know for yourself where you actually are, as I try to know it for myself. Regards. Vincent My dear Theo, I send you herewith two photographs1 — you’ll get another two of weavers later. I was planning to have 12 photographs taken, a series of Brabant scenes, including the 6 that I’m making for Hermans. I was planning to send them to a few illustrated magazines to see if I could get work, or at least become known. But I’ve decided against it, since the photographer only produces prints that reflect none, or at least far too little of the original chiaroscuro, moreover retouches a great deal and badly, and even so still often leaves things dark that are light in the painting and vice versa. I’ll have another proof made of the weavers, though, just as cartes de visite. Because I’m so far away from the illustrated magazines here I must find some means of establishing a few connections in ways other than by word of mouth. 
   I hope to make various drawings this winter, of those very same aforesaid compositions, and try sending them to the London News, say — which as you may have noticed is now often better than the Graphic and, among other things, just published a very fine Frank Holl4 and a fine landscape with sheep. I’ve worked really hard recently; I believe, in conjunction with other agitation, even overworked. At least I’m in a sad mood, and all these things have affected me to such an extent that I have many days when I’m relatively powerless. I can’t eat and I can’t sleep, that’s to say not enough, and that makes one weak. But I’ll get over it, particularly because I have fairly good tidings from Utrecht. But I’m still very concerned because I fear it will be a long time before she recovers completely. 
   Perhaps it will also take me a long time before I get over it. I still deeply regret, Theo, that I’m on one side, you on the other, of a certain barricade that may no longer be visible in the form of paving-stones, but which still definitely exists and persists in society. In that lithograph by Daumier or De Lemud, whichever of them it may be, the main subject is precisely a person whose story I remember. There were two brothers and they were on the same side and both fell, one a day after the other, for the same cause. That might have been so in our case, but now it’s as good as certain that it will never happen. For my part I’m well aware that, come what may, the future will always be very difficult for me, and I know as good as for certain that things won’t go what people describe as well for me in the future. 
   I believe that Pa also feels something of the fact that it’s more fate than deliberate design when there’s sometimes such a decided difference of opinion. But I wish to hit no one; wish that Pa hadn’t sometimes gone and stood right in front of me. Anyway, I sometimes think now and again that painting can in any event forestall many disasters, and that otherwise it would be even worse. I presently have no other plans for the future except to continue with my Brabant subjects until I’ve got them so far that I could dispose of them in Belgium, say, and sell a few drawings elsewhere. Then, when I feel on rather firmer ground, I’d like to go back to the miners again. I’d be forever gratified if you were gradually to arrange it in such a way that we can’t hit each other, even though the gun barrels are pointing in opposite directions. I don’t ask of you that you sympathize with my work, for instance, but if you ever hear of a resource, tell me. Rappard has been in Drenthe and on Terschelling again, and appears to have netted a goodly catch of studies. He’s probably coming here again for a while in October. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   The painting of the sower is the same size as the woman spinning; the colour of the soil is neutral but slightly pink, light green further away. The man’s smock is blue and the trousers brown. The gaiters dirty linen. I fancy that the head shows up against the sky better in the painting than in the photograph. Listen, Theo — about the barricade — you know there’s been a time in my life when I was also in the Guizot people’s camp7 — I’ve also believed all sorts of fine and good things about Pa and Haanebeek, about Grandfather, about ‘the Guizots’ in short. But when I regretted it, you know that I also turned around with energy and tenacity. The newer men of today don’t want me, though — that’s all right, I DON’T CARE ABOUT THAT — both as people and as painters, I prefer the generation of around 48 to around 84, but as to 48, not the Guizots but the revolutionaries, Michelet — and also the peasant painters of Barbizon. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, thanks for the enclosure. Now listen here. What you write is all very well and good, and as far as fuss is concerned I’m beginning to be a bit better prepared to forestall it than before. No fear that Pa and Ma will leave, for instance. Although a call came just now. On the contrary, if they set about it the right way, Pa and Ma will be able to consolidate their position here. Now there are people who say to me, ‘what were you doing getting involved with her?’ — that’s one fact. Now there are people who say to her, ‘what were you doing getting involved with him?’ — that’s a second fact. Apart from that, both she and I have sorrow enough and trouble enough — but regret — neither of us. Look here — 


I 
certainly 
believe 
or 
know 
for 
sure 
that 
she 
loves 
me,



I
,,
believe
,,
,,
,,
,,
,,
I
,,
her


 that has been sincere — has it also been crazy — etc.? Perhaps it has, if you like, but the wise people who never do anything that’s crazy, aren’t they even crazier in my eyes than I in theirs? That can be said against your argument and other arguments. I say all this simply by way of explanation, not hostilely or nastily. 
   You say you like Octave Mouret, you said you’re like him. Since last year I’ve also read the second volume, in which he pleases me much more than in the first. I recently heard it said that ‘Au bonheur des dames’ wouldn’t add particularly to Zola’s reputation. I find some of the greatest and best things in it. I’ve just looked it up, and I’m copying out a few of Octave Mouret’s words for you. You — haven’t you gone to the Bourdoncle side over the last 1  1/2  years or so? Would have done better to stick with Mouret; that was and still is my opinion. Aside from an enormous difference in circumstances, indeed diametrically opposed circumstances, I tend more towards the Mouret direction than you might think — as regards my belief in women and that one needs them, must love them. (Mouret says, ‘in our establishment, we love the customers’.)4 Think about this — and remember my sorrow about your saying that you had ‘cooled’.
   I repeat more forcefully than ever everything I said by way of bitter warning against the influence of Guizot-ness, as I called it. Why? It leads to mediocrity. And I don’t want to see you among the mediocrities because I have loved you, indeed still love you, too much to be able to bear seeing you numbed. I know it’s difficult, I know that I don’t know enough about you, I know that I may perhaps be mistaken. But anyway — just read your Mouret again. I mentioned a difference between Mouret and what I should want, and yet the parallels. Look here. Mouret worships the modern Parisian woman — very well. But Millet, Breton, worship the peasant woman with the same passion. These two passions are one and the same. Read Zola’s description of women in a room at dusk — women often already past 30, up to 50 — such a sombre, mysterious little corner. I find it magnificent, indeed sublime. But equally sublime to my mind is — Millet’s Angelus, that same dusk, that same infinite emotion — or that solitary figure by Breton in the Luxembourg, or his Spring.
   You’ll say that I’m not successful. I don’t care, vanquish or be vanquished, in all events one has emotion and motion, and they’re more similar than they appear and are said to be. As regards this woman in question, how it must end remains a mystery to me, but neither she nor I will do anything crazy. I fear for her that the old religion will numb and freeze her again11 with that damned icy coldness that has already shattered her once in the distant past to the point of death, long years ago. Oh — I’m no friend of present-day Christianity, even though the founder was sublime — I’ve seen through present-day Christianity only too well. It mesmerized me, that icy coldness in my youth — but I’ve had my revenge since then. How? By worshipping the love that they — the theologians — call sin, by respecting a whore etc., and not many would-be respectable, religious ladies. To the one party, woman is always heresy and diabolical. To me, the opposite. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Look at this from Octave Mouret12 — Mouret says: ‘If you believe yourself strong, because you refuse to be foolish and to suffer! Ah, well — then you are nothing but a dupe, no more!’13 ‘Are you enjoying yourself?’ Mouret seemed not to understand immediately. But, when he recalled their old conversations about empty foolishness and the pointless torment of life, he replied: ‘No doubt — never have I lived so much... Ah! old chap — don’t mock! Those are the shortest hours in which one dies of suffering! I want her, I’ll have her! and — if she escapes me you’ll see the things that I’ll do to cure myself of it. You don’t understand this language, old chap; otherwise, you’d know that action contains its reward within itself — to act — to create — to struggle against facts, vanquish them or be vanquished by them, all human joy and health are there!’ 
   Just a way of deadening oneself — the other muttered. ‘Ah, well! I prefer to deaden myself. To die for the sake of dying — i prefer to die of passion than to die of boredom!’ 

it isn’t only I who say this last, 
after 
all,


but she too, instinctively
,,
,,


 that’s why I saw something grand in her from the outset, and it’s just a damned shame for her that when she was young she allowed herself to be overwhelmed by disappointments. Overwhelmed in the sense that the Begemann family of the old religion believed it had to suppress the active, indeed brilliant principle in her, and made her passive for ever and ever. If only they hadn’t broken her when she was young! Or if they’d left it at that and not driven her to distraction again!, this time with 5 or 6 or even more women fighting against her alone. Do read L’evangeliste by Daudet about these female intrigues, which were different here but still of the same kind.
   Oh Theo, why should I change? In the past I was very passive and very gentle and quiet — not any more, but I’m not a child any more either — sometimes I feel myself. Take Mauve — why is he irascible and by no means always mild? I’m not yet as far as he is, but still I’ll get further than I am. I tell you, if one wants to be active, one mustn’t be afraid to do something wrong sometimes, not afraid to lapse into some mistakes. To be good — many people think that they’ll achieve it by doing no harm — and that’s a lie, and you said yourself in the past that it was a lie. That leads to stagnation, to mediocrity. Just slap something on it when you see a blank canvas staring at you with a sort of imbecility. You don’t know how paralyzing it is, that stare from a blank canvas that says to the painter you can’t do anything. The canvas has an idiotic stare, and mesmerizes some painters so that they turn into idiots themselves.
   Many painters are afraid of the blank canvas, but the blank canvas is afraid of the truly passionate painter who dares — and who has once broken the spell of ‘you can’t’.  Life itself likewise always turns towards one an infinitely meaningless, discouraging, dispiriting blank side on which there is nothing, any more than on a blank canvas. But however meaningless and vain, however dead life appears, the man of faith, of energy, of warmth, and who knows something, doesn’t let himself be fobbed off like that. He steps in and does something, and hangs on to that, in short, breaks, ‘violates’ — they say. Let them talk, those cold theologians. Theo, I feel such damned pity for this woman, precisely because her age and just possibly a liver and gall bladder disorder are hanging so fatally over her head. And this is made worse by the emotions. Still, we’ll see what can be done or what’s made impossible by fate. I’ll do nothing, though, without a very good doctor, so I shan’t do her any harm. 
   Yet it was at precisely this time that it happened that I was asked to make a drawing or painted sketch for 20 guilders. Which I duly acceded to, but because I suspected, and on investigation found my suspicion was correct, that Margot Begemann was behind it and would have given me the money indirectly, I most decidedly refused the payment but not the drawing, which I sent. It’s not easy to refuse it, though, when one is sorely in need of money. But it would have been a bridge of asses — so —  Instead of bridges of asses — is there something better to do? I very definitely believe so. For your sake and mine and for many others, I wish that we could get Mourets in the art trade who knew how to create a broader, new buying public. You’ll say, isn’t Tersteeg, for instance, a Mouret. Perhaps he is, after all. But be that as it may, there are still new careers to be made, simply because the public that buys paintings could be multiplied tenfold, and this is becoming more necessary by the day. 
 0  Were a few Mourets to emerge, who bought and sold other than according to the old routine, good, then there would be more and more work to be done. But if no Mourets come — then — perhaps the trade should change utterly because the painters themselves revived it and started their own permanent exhibitions without the old intermediary. I wish you knew and felt how young you still are if you would only act young and be daring. If you aren’t an artist in painting, be an artist as a dealer, just like Mouret. For my part — at times like these, when I get completely stuck — I still feel that in a few years’ time I’ll happily dare take on a great many larger bills for paint and other things. I want to have a lot of work — believe me — I have no intention of being bored — do a great deal or die. My dear Theo, Here are the two photographs of the weavers. Next week I hope to send you two subjects from the decorations for Hermans. You know well enough that your criticism, at least over the last 1 1/2  years, appears to me to be just a sort of vitriol. Don’t think that I don’t know that against that vitriol one must furnish oneself with a sort of hide that it can’t easily penetrate, and that if one is hardened to it, it doesn’t trouble one much — so — what do I care? I also believe, moreover, that you mean well. So what more do you want? I continue just to say this, that I maintain that it’s absolutely not only my fault if the money you give me produces a poor return not only for you, but also a poor return for me. The former, that it produces a poor return for you, saddens me more than the latter, that it also produces a poor return for me. It can get better, you’ll say — yes, but then not only I, but also you, will have to change a great deal. I wanted to let you know that in the winter, perhaps as early as next month, I’m going away from here for a while — I’ve thought about Antwerp — I’ve thought about The Hague. But in the last few days I’ve thought of something that’s possibly even better. First of all, I want in any event to have a bit of city life, a bit of a change of scene, since 
   I’ve been either in Drenthe or here in Nuenen for a full year and more. And I believe that this will be a beneficial change for me in general, for my mood, which hasn’t been nor could be as cheerful as I’d like, particularly recently. Now look here — Stracké the sculptor lives in Den Bosch, he’s also the principal of a drawing academy there — I saw a terracotta by a pupil of his, and heard on that occasion that Stracké is definitely not ill-disposed or indifferent to anyone in this area who does something in art. That he has various models for the academy in Den Bosch, and that there are people he gives the opportunity to draw the nude or to model in clay. One probably has to pay the model oneself, though, but that’s not so very expensive, and moreover one has a good classroom for which one does not pay. I’ll find out more about this, and then it’s not impossible that I might go to Stracké in the way that Breitner went to 
  Cormon, say. This would be in the area5 and would also work out the cheapest. I’ve bought a very fine work on anatomy, Anatomy for artists by John Marshall, which was expensive but which will also be of use to me all my life because it’s very good. What’s more, I also have what they use at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts and what they use in Antwerp. Things like that make large holes in my pocket, though. I tell you this solely to make you understand, for heaven’s sake, that if I haven’t paid Pa and Ma for being here at home it isn’t because I don’t want to pay but because I’ve incurred many expenses that for my part I simply don’t consider unnecessary. The key to many things is a thorough knowledge of the human body, but it definitely costs money to learn it. And I think moreover that colour, that chiaroscuro, that perspective, that tone, that drawing, everything in short — certainly also have fixed laws that one must and can study like chemistry or algebra. This is by no means the easiest view of things, and anyone who says — oh, it must all come naturally — is making light of it. If that were enough — — But it’s not enough, because however much one knows instinctively, it’s precisely then that one must redouble one’s efforts, in my view, to get from instinct to REASON. You mustn’t imagine that I earned anything from that work for Hermans — the first day I got two invoices for the stretchers, canvases and a number of tubes of paint that amounted to more than I’d received from him to pay them straightaway. 
   I told him that I didn’t want to leave those bills outstanding, and did he want to put them in his name or would he give me something in advance. Oh no, he said, just leave them, they don´t have to be paid straightaway. I said — yes, they do, they have to be paid straightaway. Then he gave me 25 guilders. Then I had all my expenses for models (not counting my time, effort &c.), but since then I haven’t seen any more money from him, which I also haven’t asked for. On the contrary — because he liked my work from first to last, if need be I consider I’ve already been paid. Since, moreover, the canvases remain my property and it’s up to me what I spend on them. But enough, since those strainers, canvases &c. I’ve certainly had 20 guilders in expenses, perhaps even more, but haven’t even got it back yet. Only the man is happy, and pleased with me. Then is it a good policy to ask for money? To my mind, precisely WHEN PEOPLE ARE HAPPY, one should take care to reduce one’s price rather than raise it. Particularly when, after all, the sum isn’t such that receiving it or not makes a great deal of difference. If I get by, perhaps I’ll do it precisely by working more cheaply than others and by making it easier for the art lovers. Well, Hermans is very good and a man to keep in with, and he’s certainly rich — but — has always been tight-fisted rather than generous. Something very different from an actual miser, but all the same — I’m earning less (a whole lot less) than nothing. But having noticed this, I’m very amicable and obliging towards him. I have a very pleasant, congenial friend in him, and it’s certainly striking to see a man of 608 doing his best to learn to paint with the same freshness of enthusiasm as if he were 20. What he does isn’t beautiful, but he works hard and has already copied 4 of my 6 with a different sentiment, and his has something medieval, something of Peasant Bruegel about it.
   You once said to me that I would always be isolated. I don’t believe it — you’re decidedly mistaken in my character. And for my part I have absolutely no intention of becoming less passionate in ideas or in life than I am. By no means — if I meet with a rebuff, even if I’m often mistaken — often wrong — that — it’s all very well as far as it goes11 — fundamentally, though, I’m not wrong. It’s neither the best paintings nor the best people — in which there are no errors or bias. And again, although these may seem to be toothless12 times, they aren’t really. I also definitely deny that my assertion that certain parties are just as strongly opposed to each other in 84 as they were in 48 is exaggerated. It’s something other than that ditch of yours, that I assure you — I’m speaking here of the parties, rather than specifically of you and me — but you and I also belong somewhere, stand either on the right or on the left, don’t we, whether or not we’re aware of it. For my part, I always have a bias — then, if you will and if you think you can do it, it’s up to you to stand neither on the right nor on the left — I take the liberty of doubting most strongly the feasibility of doing so. And above all the practical use. 
   I’ve had a relatively good letter from Utrecht, that she’s recovered to the extent that she can go to The Hague for a while, where she has to be for business. But I’m still far from easy about it. The tone of her letters is much more self-confident, much more correct and less prejudiced than when I first knew her. Something also of the complaint of a bird whose nest has been robbed — she isn’t as angry about society as I am, perhaps, but nonetheless she does see in it the ‘naughty boys who rob nests’ — and who take pleasure in it and laugh. Pa will not accept the call, that’s certain.  But a piece of news these days is that the minister in Helvoirt has died16 and so the parish is vacant. I consider it very likely that now they’d want to have Pa back there again, and at least the family in Helvoirt17 will sound Pa out about it. But since it was only the day before yesterday that the good minister dropped dead, I know nothing more about whether or not they’ll call Pa. But would think it very likely. Listen, about what I call a barricade and you a little ditch, there’s simply an old society that to my mind is going under through its own fault — there’s a new society that has come into being and grown, and will go on. In short, there is what emanates from revolutionary and what emanates from anti-revolutionary principles. Now I ask you whether you yourself haven’t often noted that the policy of hovering between the old and the new isn’t tenable. Just think about that. Sooner or later it ends with one openly standing either on the right or on the left. It isn’t a little ditch. And once more, then it was 48, now it’s 84 — then there was a barricade of paving-stones — now not of paving-stones, but a barricade as regards the irreconcilability of old and new — oh, that is still there, as much, certainly, in 84 as in 48. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent  My dear Theo, Here are a couple more cartes de visite to give you an idea of that decoration for Hermans — of which these are two canvases. Rappard is here at the moment and sends you his regards. He’s made a very fine study of a girl’s head and one of a farmyard, and two small ones of ox-carts. And various others that he’s planning should follow. I’m working on a figure of a shepherd wearing a greatcoat — which is the same size as the woman spinning. And apart from that a study of two Pollard willows with the yellow leaves of poplars behind them and a view across the fields.
   It’s extraordinarily beautiful here at the moment with the autumnal effects. In a fortnight we’ll have the real fall of the leaves — when everything that’s on the trees falls in a few days. If I have some luck with the shepherd, it will be a figure that will have something of the very old Brabant in it. Anyway, it isn’t finished yet, and we’ll see how it turns out. You could have dropped me a line in reply to what I wrote to you recently — it seems to me — even if it was only because it might shake up your own ideas, perhaps. For my part — despite much old and new sorrow — I have less and less doubt about my future, both as to my work and even as to myself. 
   All the same, I know that I’ll have many a struggle in both respects — that both my work and I myself will meet with resistance, will make a bad impression in many cases, but not in all. And as to my work, I become keener on it by the day, and I’m regaining my high spirits as if I were 20. So I must see to it that I go to Antwerp sometime — often enough in the past6 I’ve sold things that authorities declared unsaleable. If I wanted to sell something in the past then it didn’t always fall through if I really wanted someone to take this thing or that. And perhaps you’re right that I should just find a way for my work myself, and become my own dealer. Anyway. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Here are a couple of smaller photos of the studies of which you already have the larger ones. I’m sending them because — should it ever come to it — I want you to be able to show something of mine. Rappard is still here and will be staying for another week since the work is going extraordinarily well. He’s making women spinning and various studies of heads, has already made 10 studies or so, all of which I consider fine. We’ve talked together quite a lot about Impressionism — I think that you would classify his work as that. But here in Holland it’s hard to work out what Impressionism is actually trying to say. But both he and I are greatly interested in what the present aim is. And it’s certain that unexpected new ideas are beginning to emerge. That paintings are once again beginning to be painted in very different tone from a few years ago. The last thing I made is a rather large study of an avenue of poplars with the yellow autumn leaves, where the sun makes glittering patches here and there on the fallen leaves on the ground, which are interspersed with the long shadows cast by the trunks.
   At the end of the road a peasant cottage, and the blue sky above it between the autumn leaves. I think that in a year’s time — having spent that year once again painting a great deal and constantly — I’ll change my manner of painting and my colour a great deal, and that I’m likely to become slightly more sombre rather than lighter. The spectrum of Rappard’s work has also become much lower. The heads that he’s painting at present are reminiscent in their effect of certain studies of heads by Courbet, say. But it’s becoming devilish good, that I can assure you. Because of one thing and another I discussed with him, it may well be that I prefer to stay here and carry on working here rather than go somewhere else. As a result of his visit I’ve again got new ideas for my own work, and have so many things in my head which I’d like to make that, after all, I can’t easily postpone getting on with them right away. Besides, I want to settle my paint bills before the New Year, and can’t afford any extra expenditure. 
   Because if I went to Antwerp I’d obviously want to do a lot of work and would need models for it, which I fear would work out too dear for the moment. But in general Rappard advises me not to do it right away, but after having painted here for another few months, and to try to get a pied-à-terre to make nude studies. But I’ll be able to benefit more from Antwerp if I first paint another 30 heads here — and I’m starting on those 30 heads now, or rather I’ve already started with a large bust of a shepherd. Rappard has done the same in Drenthe and on Terschelling this summer, and it has helped him to make a good deal of progress. I’ve just seen a reproduction of a Lhermitte — The inn — two workmen and a woman, do you know it? 
   The last few days R. and I have been on some long excursions, and visited people house by house — we’ve seen lots of beautiful things, just because of the magnificent autumnal effects. And also discovered new models. Perhaps a few other painters might come to this region next year. I wish they would, because one shouldn’t go for too long without ever seeing any painters. Well — as to that — I’ll get new acquaintances before too long in any event. Regards, from Rappard too. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter, and I thank you for it and for the enclosure. When you write that you’re again facing your bad half year — for it lasts a  1/2  year, I think — it isn’t exactly pleasant news for you to write nor for me to receive. However, we must try to do something about it to ensure that things go better for both of us. Before I received your letter and enclosure, I had already done something that you probably won’t approve of, but about which I don’t really value your opinion much, I’m sorry to have to say. I have again set in train an attempt to get back on good terms with Mauve, with Tersteeg too, if possible. I don’t know whether it will succeed — however, I must have more scope, for with the best will in the world, if one has been, as I have now, A WHOLE YEAR AND MORE entirely outside the world of painting, one works oneself into the ground outside and has to refresh oneself. You never feel or understand that and say ‘just keep on painting’, and that’s all you can say. I don’t blame you for it, but I don’t find it intelligent of you either — be aware of that. 
   What you say is perfectly true: that if I make good paintings I’m more likely to achieve something than by discussing revolutionary questions.(*)1 I actually find this so true that while you were writing it I was just taking a step directly aimed at the progress of my work, by asking once more to paint a few studies in Mauve’s studio. You always contradict yourself — the above-mentioned passage (*) in your letter is immediately followed by the question as to whether I could perhaps give you some new principles about the issue of reforming the trade. I’d like to recommend one to you in your and in my personal interests (never mind about the general interest): back my approach to Mauve and to Tersteeg. 
       Help me to get going and earn money, not only by sending money but also through your influence and more cooperation and a better sort of friendship. I say again, back the approach I’ve made, for instance, for it should have been made sooner with support on your part. Do it generously and resolutely, not hesitating or being non-committal when it comes to the point. There’s enough strength in me to be able to do something and to earn too. And then — as you say yourself — if I make progress with my paintings and capture a good, independent position, I’ll be worth more than now. 
   Then — later in other words — when I’m doing a bit better — I’ll be very happy to try to give you new principles about the issues of reforming the trade — concerning which I certainly do have my ideas, which derive from my own experience of what hinders painters’ progress, and what sort of things sometimes make the painter’s life unbearable. Now isn’t the moment to write to you about it at length. I only say this — if you or if I need money to make progress and if we can only work at half speed at the moment for financial reasons, we’ll have to see to it that we get it, and struggle on until we do get it — Not argue that ‘we’re facing a half year that’s going to be bad financially, so reconcile yourself to it’. What has to be found, can be. I’ve written to Mauve and to T. If you want to support me, so much the better. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Don’t misunderstand me, though — I haven’t written to M. or to Tersteeg in a complaining tone. On the contrary, but I have said as forcefully as I could: give me another opportunity to make some studies with Mauve. That’s what I asked — nothing else, and that’s all I need. They mustn’t be involved in the financial side at all. If I can’t save up for it myself, you’ll have to make the utmost effort to send me an extra 100 francs, because I won’t be going for long —  or if you absolutely can’t, Pa will have to try to advance it. I’ll hammer away at it until M. agrees. 
   If I don’t succeed on my own, we must both ask Mauve until he does it. Then — after that — I’ll again have a few tips for improving my work here and making progress with it. And again have a pied-à-terre with a good, sound painter. And then I guarantee that something will soon happen — either I’ll exhibit or I’ll sell. When I wrote to you, ACT, it isn’t just a WORD, Theo — you hear! But it’s to say to you, are we going onward together or would you rather stay behind? I’d rather we went onward together, but there mustn’t be any nagging. 
  If the financial aspect was a problem both for you and for Pa, then I could get it from Rappard. And so, courage! But let’s go onward together and hammer away at it together until we’ve achieved it. If you don’t want to join me, then I’ll carry on alone. Do give me an answer to this. Of course, I may hear nothing from M. or T. If I hear anything, I’ll write to you immediately. And if it takes too long, it will have to be repeated, either by me alone or by both of us, just as you wish. Rappard is doing very well and several others too, but they really haven’t had only patience and resignation. We must go onward. 
   Get used to the idea that we must move. It’s not for nothing that I’ve been slogging away at the principles of drawing as well as of colour and painting technique since I was first with M. I’ve learned some new things, but I need Mauve again, or someone else who’s very clever — not to make me swollen-headed — but to give me some courage, which fails me if things drag on too long. Onward — and it doesn’t matter a damn if it fails — if it fails, then do it again.  It’s essential to carry on forcefully — with renewed energy — and then the business between you and me can work out to our mutual satisfaction, and instead of rebukes and nasty remarks, something spirited and good can come of it. It’s very true that I’ve spent more this year than last on firstly my work, secondly myself. I’m not sorry for it, though — I’ve progressed in precisely what will rectify things in painting later and — the only thing I do regret is that I haven’t been able to spend a few hundred guilders more. What I’ve gained by it, for instance, is that I can now easily paint a head from the model in a morning, and that at last my colour is becoming sounder and more accurate, and more character is appearing in the technique. Now I can well understand that what I say — I needed and still need money for this — will be criticized. But one can’t ignore the fact that one needs working capital for the profession of painter just as much as for simply the shoemaker’s trade, for instance. 
 0  Working capital that could generate very good interest after a few years, then anyway, 20% to start with, for example. And could be paid back later. So that the money from you, say we call it 5, francs at a pinch, is my working capital. The interest on this — if we could get it to 20% through the energy of both of us — would be proof of the rightness of your insights and also of mine, and of a sound view of business. Now that result — 20% interest a year on 5, francs — I’d like you to help me get it. These are facts and figures, and you must see to it that you get your confidence and energy back in this matter. I’ll have to work hard to achieve this result — but — as I see it — for your part you can just do something you said you’d do before — take my side — not neutrally but energetically, positively. 
 1  I tell you once more from total conviction, from the BUSINESS point of view — as a dealer, if you will, that the system of only doing business when one is sure of succeeding is not the best, and actually one of looking at things from a mediocre point of view. Doing business, doing something come what may and moving for the sake of moving, hating stagnation and sterility, is to my mind a more open-hearted and also more profitable way. So the eternal — not being non-committal — not worrying about things too much — having a certain self-confidence — these things, I already spoke about them in the past; and what a few later years showed me, was truly to become more convinced that carrying on a fight and concentrating on a few points, but at the same time risking everything, is the best thing. But the cooler characters — the Bourdoncles5 — doubt this. However, I’m quite prepared to appreciate them, too, and they undoubtedly have their qualities — but to push something through, to persevere, to win... when it comes to the point, they lapse into vacillation and hesitancy. 
 2  And then, naturally, business marks time and comes to a standstill. Anyway. Now look here — to make progress, because I’m just getting into my stride, I have to paint 50 heads. As soon as possible and one after the other. I have calculated, but it won’t be possible to work with the energy that I want to devote to it in terms of exertion and effort without extra. I needed an overcoat — because I’m taking more trouble over my clothes than before — and other things, including the paint bills, take a lot of what I get. So that in order to carry out my plan quickly, working at full speed (instead of half speed for the sake of economy — and yet, that can actually save nothing), I must manage to get an extra 100 francs. In order to win over Tersteeg and Mauve, I must do something decidedly energetic now, having broached the matter. Is it absolutely impossible for you to let me have it now? I must strike the iron now, it’s hot, but — my dear brother and friend — STOKE UP THE FIRE. Adieu. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, You’ll certainly be interested in how things stand with the call to Helvoirt that Pa received. Pa told the people in Helvoirt that he certainly couldn’t even consider it unless the H. stipend was brought up to the level of the Nuenen stipend. And Pa writes today that they don’t seem to be raising any objections to making up the difference in stipend — they have to add 150 guilders to it, I believe. So although nothing has been decided — given the willingness of the good natives of Helvoirt — there’s a real chance that as a result of his own words Pa will have to consider it very seriously. This is important to me, because I would certainly not want to go to Helvoirt with them. I just wanted to tell you exactly how things stand. These last few days, although it’s freezing quite hard here, I’ve been working outdoors on a rather large study (more than 1 metre) of an old water mill in Gennep, on the other side of Eindhoven. I want to finish the whole thing outdoors — but it will definitely be the last that I paint outdoors this year. Since I wrote to you I’ve also been working on other studies — among them two heads of polder workers. I now have 3 people in Eindhoven who want to learn to paint and whom I’m teaching to paint still lifes.
   I can safely say that I’ve progressed in painting technique and in colour since your visit. And that this will continue to improve, too. In painting, it’s the first steps that count6 — it gets easier later, and I have some trumps in my hand. And I think there are tricks to be taken with them. Now you know that I made an approach to Mauve and Tersteeg again, to put right what happened in the past. I don’t regret that approach. But they’ve refused to have anything to do with it — ‘very definitely’ refused. This doesn’t discourage me. I regard it as something like sending a painting to an exhibition and having it rejected. One has to encounter opposition at first, or even several times. So again, I don’t regret my approach, and shall most likely repeat it — not straightaway, exactly — but before too long. 
   I wanted to tell you now that I’d be very pleased if you didn’t just stay neutral in this matter — but on the contrary helped me to get what I want. I’ve admitted I was wrong, not just to Mauve but to T. as well. All the more because I believe that later on they themselves will realize that for their part they totally misunderstood things. Which they don’t see yet. So for my part, by going so far this time as to very generously and decidedly admit I was wrong in the past, moreover to simply show them work as it gets better, in any event I won’t have to make any more apologies in future. Once is enough, and I didn’t necessarily even have to go as far as I did, namely — unconditionally. Getting them to be generous for their part — is another thing – you could assist in this if you want to. If not — don’t bother about it, but then after a while I’ll return to it again on my own. 
   I don’t know how you’ll have taken my last letter — which wasn’t meant angrily. My affairs can prosper, and in both our interests I wish that we could concentrate the strength we have at our disposal. I’ve replied briefly to both Tersteeg and M. about their refusal, to tell them that ‘I rather agree with Tersteeg that it would be better for me to seek out new people than to try to renew old relationships, that this really is my own idea, too, but above and beyond that, that I nonetheless have enough faith in the future that I will not lightly give up regaining even old relationships, even better than before’. This has been my answer to T. And is also what I tell you — I believe that it’s possible — to get on better terms than the present ones — with you, too. But — speaking bluntly — I think that you’ve been too neutral towards me the last 1  1/2 or two years, and I wish above all for more warmth, and the friendship was too cool and not animated enough for me. Find this pedantic of me if you will — yet it isn’t pedantic but it’s for sound practical reasons that I pointed this out to you before and point it out again. Margot Begemann is coming back to Nuenen one of these days7 — I’ve always remained good friends with her, and it’s on my advice that she did not give in to her sisters, who let it be seen that they’d rather she stayed away and who keep telling her that in their view she has made a hash of things. On the contrary, her family has obligations towards her, and in the past she put her own money into the business when her brother8 went bankrupt.
   The issue here is that if she and I choose to love each other, be attached to each other — indeed have been for a long time — this is no wrongdoing on our part nor something for which people may blame us. Either her or me. And in my view it’s absurd that people felt they should get worked up about it — and then — in their opinion — in my interest or in hers. That was a bad turn. Anyone may do this with the best intentions — yet — — — Louis Begemann — he had his objections, too, but was such and remained such that both she and I could talk to him, 
   and it was precisely because he was humane and calm that it didn’t turn out much worse, and when that happened with her, which only I knew about, he could help and all the others only hindered. And we were in complete agreement about the steps to be taken then. Three days before, after all, I had already warned him and said, I’m concerned about your sister. Most certainly, at some time she has done greater or lesser good turns for pretty well all the people here in the neighbourhood, either in sickness or when they were in some trouble or other. 
   And she and I actually became attached during Ma’s illness. She has just written to me: should there be any people sick in Nuenen, do go and visit them and see if anything can be done to help. Well, there are a thousand things of that nature in her. And to put it very mildly, one can say that there has been a most deplorable misunderstanding here. I think that, with hindsight, you would now no longer speak as you did on that evening.
   That concerned me alone — and I could take it, so there’s no question of my reproaching you in this matter. Only as an explanation for you, I say, just as you spoke to me, who can take it, so her sisters10 spoke to her, who was made distraught by it. You have nothing to do with it, because you spoke to me, who can take it, and you did not speak to her. But the real fault lies with her sisters, or rather one of the sisters in particular, who proves to be very hard, since she’s actually still sulking and bearing a grudge. You — would have to tell me again yourself that you bear a grudge — before I would suspect you of it. So much on my part to you. My dear Theo, I read your last letter to Pa and Ma yesterday evening; I thought the tone of it good and serious. Just yesterday I brought home the study of the water mill at Gennep, which I enjoyed working on1 — and which brought me a new acquaintance in Eindhoven, who passionately wants to learn to paint and whom I paid a visit, and then we immediately got down to work together. So that by the evening he had a still life down, and I had his promise that he’ll make 30 of them this winter, which I’ll come and look at and help him with each time. He’s a tanner who has time and money, and is about 40, so this can become something more feasible than Hermans, who nonetheless is really sustaining his ambition and is still working just as hard as on the first day, in other words spends almost all his time on it. I have an idea that this new fellow will soon learn to see colour. I have a plan, though, to gradually get people to pay something — not in money, however, but by telling them you must give me tubes of paint. 
   Because I want to paint a lot — continually, and I want to get to a position where I no longer have to work at half speed — but can paint from morning till night. You mustn’t think that I’m so very eager for people to approve of all my work and my doings in general. On the contrary, at this moment, for example, I’m almost more pleased that Mauve and Tersteeg refused me than if it had been the opposite. You must understand me! It’s — because I think I can feel the power in me to bring them round anyway, despite everything. I should not, even if I hadn’t felt that I have a fixed goal, because in the last few years I’ve slogged away at the abc of drawing and painting, harder than they imagine — I should not, I say, have turned to them again and engaged in a new battle if I hadn’t had a firm conviction that I could win it. I have no certainty whatsoever of winning it, though, but I dare to gamble on the chance, and so I won’t retreat now that I’ve started to approach the public. 
   I’ll become stronger in the very struggle itself, and learn more through criticism, through unwillingness and even resistance, than through resignation. What I wrote to you, though, I must definitely, definitely insist upon. I’ve resolved to make a certain number of studies for which, however I calculate it, I don’t have enough money and which I may not postpone for any reason in the world. The New Year is in prospect, around that time I have to pay some things, and have actually already paid some this month. But this means that I haven’t enough for my work and, if I don’t have a stroke of luck, I’ll lose a month’s work — and that may not happen in the circumstances. And try to make the utmost effort to let me have an extra 100 francs. For my part, I’ll see about getting a contribution for paint from the people I’m giving lessons to.
   I hope that you’ll feel that precisely because I approached Mauve and T. and they refuse, directly or indirectly I must show — and that very soon — that I’ve done something again — and that all energy now has to remain concentrated and work has to proceed at full speed, even if it were to work out slightly dearer. That will be returned and I stand by what I said, from now on we must see to it that we at least get good interest on the capital invested in it. There has been a change in my colour since you were here7 — which I already had a presentiment about when you were here — and you’ll see that with some more studies, those I’m writing to you about now should be finished in a few months, my studies will irrefutably prove that I really do know something about colour. I can’t help it, but I’m short at the moment — precisely because I’ve painted more than could actually be afforded — and there can be no economizing now — because by striking now, while the iron’s hot, we can win important points. I recall having said in my last letter ‘that I didn’t value your opinion any more’. I don’t mean that as severely as it sounds — I just mean that I’ve decided to press on in some respects more with passion than with prudence, because this is in my character and I really can’t feel at home in cooler calculation. And yet I calculate too. 
   The extra I’m asking for I’m not asking for all at once — but here’s how. Try to send 20 francs extra around 20 Nov. — 1 December the usual, around 20 December another 20 francs extra, and the same in January. Then I’m covered for the ends of those months and won’t have to stop for days when the work demands that I don’t lose a moment. If it can be a little more, so much the better, but try to do at least what I asked above. And for my part I’ll perhaps also be able to get something from this new acquaintance in the form of tubes of paint. Hermans is preposterously miserly or rather beastly selfish, not just to me but with everyone; all the same, he’s someone with whom I intend to remain good friends — because he’s quite remarkably doing his best. I don’t think I’m mistaken about Tersteeg and Mauve when I dare say that there really is a chance of getting at them and winning them over. 
   They can be won over by colour and I see a chance, by taking pains, to demonstrate to them convincingly that I understand and have a feeling for colour. And then — there’s more and more demand for portraits — and there aren’t so very many who can do that, and I want to try to learn to render a head with character. I’ve become particularly keen on this recently because my grasp of colour is becoming sounder. You don’t have to involve yourself in the question with Tersteeg and Mauve right now — don’t bother, rather, but if, say, I have the 50 heads I’m going to get ready by the end of January, then for instance — it might be good if you were unexpectedly just to say a word to them. After all, Hermans has definitely promised me that he’ll pay for a trip for me somewhere, but with a return. If I should want to go to Antwerp, I can hold him to his word, and in the winter I’ll see about making an attempt to get some contacts there — although that, too, won’t succeed the first time. It seems to me that Cor is doing extremely well — he looks much more energetic and is getting a manly air. Regards. Try to send at least 20 francs by 20 Nov. to cover the end of this month. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I suppose you already know that Pa has turned down Helvoirt. The people here gave Pa a present of about 200 guilders, that’s most kind and I’m pleased for them. The decision wasn’t a matter of indifference to me — since I wouldn’t have gone with them to H. in any case, and would either have stayed here in my studio — or would have left for Antwerp. Now — as far as I can see, the best thing for me is simply to carry on as things are — and stay here. It has truly not been going too badly for me lately. It’s true that I can’t make anything financially from my work here — but I’m making really good friends here — and I believe they’ll become even better. Last week I painted still lifes day in and day out2 with the people who are painting in Eindhoven. The new acquaintance — the tanner — whom I told you about, is really doing his best. But for my part, I also have to do something to keep on good terms with them. But I can’t see that I lose by it, since I work more enjoyably because I have some conversation. 
   Hermans has so many beautiful objects — like old jars and other antiques — that I wanted to ask you whether I could oblige you by painting a still life for your room of some of these objects — Gothic things, for instance. The ones I’ve been making with Hermans so far are simpler. But just today he said to me that if I ever want to make a painting for myself of things that are still too difficult for him to do as a study, I can take the objects with me to the studio. Please let me have an answer to this — and if you would like it, I’ll make it for you and shall select really nice things. By the way, I’ve already finished a small one. Now, as to what I asked you about covering the end of this month if possible by sending me 20 francs extra, I wish you could do that. It’s getting better for me — although my expenses aren’t getting any smaller — but we’re definitely making progress just by working very hard now. So help me with what I asked 
   if it’s at all feasible for you. Because otherwise it will soon become very difficult, and the work will suffer more than necessary. And I’ll give it back to you with my work. That’s all I can say about it. At all events I’ll ask Hermans for those objects — and make something for you with them — you’ll see for yourself what I told you about the colour, that it’s getting better. I’m also working on a watercolour of the water mill. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent Cor was unwell for a few days, and at home6 — but he’s better now. I know that it’s a difficult time for you — but we must progress and it will change a little for the good — you’ll see. Dear brother, Thanks for your letter and the money. Assuming that what you say is true, that you started to write to me repeatedly but didn’t get round to finishing the letter before — I’m in the same position, since I’ve already thrown what I wrote to you into the stove twice — because I found it either too bitter or too tame. What shall I say to you? — your letter sounds very correct to me, and has a tone like that of a good Minister for Fine Arts, say. But — that doesn’t alter the fact that it isn’t much good to me and it doesn’t satisfy me — and above all your ‘perhaps later, once you have expressed yourself more clearly, we’ll perhaps also find something in your present work — and then not act as we do now’ fine promise — but — a ministerial fata Morgana — in the eyes of someone like me, who would rather find an outlet at a lower level provided it was in the present. There you have it — that outlet in the present, with 3rd-rate dealers if necessary (not from choice) — is something I can’t ask of you in your position — so be it — but you can’t ask me to acquiesce in a ministerial fata Morgana, I’m too practical for that, after all. Please appreciate that I call you a good minister — and know only too well how damned bad the people1 above the ground floor are as a rule, so I’m very willing to treasure a few bright spots, even in the ministerial sphere. Which isn’t intransigent, and it’s for that reason that I herewith certainly piss on the sacred shrine of the intransigents — as I often do — on sacred shrines in general. To business, though — have you ever realized that I presently have more than two guilders in expenses daily — reckon 1 for the model, 1 for canvas, paint — it can’t come out any cheaper. I still have bills to pay — and — I must go to Antwerp. 
   My position here is rather too strained, I’m not comfortable at the moment and I have enough trouble sticking it out and ‘possessing my soul in patience’, as they say. At home, after all — although there are no real rows — they don’t find the prospect of my staying here too long a pleasant one. Which I can well understand. And yet I can’t leave — either altogether — or partly (partly if I keep my studio on, which is my plan) unless I make a whole lot more studies and — find something new to settle me in Antwerp. Will you please bear this in mind? And if you’d do your best to make it rather easier for me financially, I believe that then there would be a real chance of keeping the peace later, albeit it far from concord. Which I wish for myself and also for others, that calmness. What is not can yet come, you say, regarding my work — and I, regarding the perception of something other than a fata Morgana in your saying ‘later we’ll etc. — (see above)’: Today — it’s a fata Morgana to me and I wish, in any event, to try Antwerp. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and the enclosure, and also for what I received for St Nicholas too.  I want to start by telling you that your letter really amazed me — because there has been no difference of any significance between Pa and Ma and myself, and that as regards the Begemann ladies, they’ve just very recently been to see Pa and Ma in considerable numbers — not just once but several times. Whether they come as often as or less often than before is something I can’t see that I have anything to do with, nor take the least or slightest interest in. The fact that I disapprove of their attitude and will certainly continue to do so is something that I told them once — succinctly — without reverting to it again. But that has nothing further to do with whether or not they come to our house, which concerns not me but Pa and Ma and themselves. I have been courteous to everyone in that family and did not start it but they attacked me and, which bothered me more, Margot — that’s why I’ve absolutely avoided contact with them — precisely because I don’t feel capable of taking back my decided disapproval 
   of their attitude in this matter — or of concealing it. What you also know yourself — I say this for clarity, not to cause you sorrow — what you also know yourself, that in order to show you how I said what I said with composure I deliberately dropped you a brief line that I thought your own opinion wrong — (whether it is wrong is for you to decide, but I thought and think it wrong). So this is my subjective conviction — I have my own ideas in these things — my whys and wherefores — which I can feel better for myself than make them clear to you or anyone else — particularly when they have neither your attention nor your sympathy. Consequently, I let people say and think whatever they will of me more than you might imagine — but you can take this much from me ‘for your guidance’ — that just because I failed in something I don’t admit that I shouldn’t have started it — on the contrary, if I fail many times I find this a reason  even if it’s sometimes impossible to continue in exactly the same way — 
   nevertheless to try again in the same direction, since my convictions, too, are considered and intended by me, and I believe that there’s a raison d’être for them. For me personally, there’s a cardinal point of distinction between before and after the revolution — the reversal of the social position of the woman, and the collaboration one wants between men and women with equal rights, with equal freedom. I have neither the words nor the time to expand on this, nor, in the circumstances, the inclination. But enough, to my mind conventional morality is all back-to-front and I hope it will be turned around and replaced in time. Now — as to what you say about yourself, probably also for my guidance, ‘that you are mistrustful’ — very well — I don’t want to influence that. You’ve most certainly shown me this — and it’s one of those ‘symptoms’ which I told you I didn’t find very attractive nor congratulated you on. But this, too, is a subjective opinion if you will. So go ahead, be mistrustful or not mistrustful as the mood takes you, I will in any event see to it that I accept the consequences for me, and can otherwise only refer you to what I said about standing on different sides of a barricade. Do what you want according to your principles — but I’ll act according to mine, and only — if possible, 
   let’s avoid aiming at each other because we’re brothers. I’m older than you, and I’ve probably experienced some things differently and interpreted them differently from you. And this is my own responsibility, of course. That I can’t approve of everything I see you do or hear you say is something very different from wanting to bring you round to my point of view. It’s just — I like to lay my cards on the table. And bearing in mind that we must see to it that we avoid putting a spoke in each other’s wheels, I will, as I said, increasingly try to find other contacts or connections in Eindhoven, in Antwerp, in short, wherever I can. But this can’t be done all at once — and for my part it’s simply and solely because you’ve shown me all too clearly and unmistakably that I mustn’t imagine that you intend to involve yourself with me personally or with my work other than by way of patronage. Well, you can count me out. And while, without words, without sympathy, I’ve received the money very regularly but very coolly each month, I have — kept working — but — increasingly realizing that a moment could come when we each go our own way instead of the same way together. I don’t suppose in the least that I’ll gain by it financially — but — as soon as some dealer or other, however much of a cheapjack — gives me board and, even if it’s a tiny attic, lodgings and some paint, I’ll sell myself with great pleasure — if you choose to call it selling. Preferable to patronage. There you see my cards on the table. And whether I’ll succeed in this and when? I can’t say precisely, but — I work too hard for me to be so very far away from it. 
   I want, precisely because I foresee that if our paths ever lead us to the same place we might well find ourselves considerably at odds — I want you not to be able to blame me then for being dependent on you. I’m still in two minds as to what I should try to do — but I’ll most probably not stay here after all — and then where to go will be the question. I don’t think that you’ll approve of my coming to Paris — but what can I do about it? You flatly refuse to look after my interests — very well — but I can’t just leave it at that. I wouldn’t have thought of it if you had written less decidedly that it was beneath you, but now — well, now — I can take no notice of you. In short, I don’t want to exchange the chance (even if it is only a chance) of making it, not even for the certainty of patronage which is, after all, rather tight. Since I see that I’m forfeiting my chance of selling by continuing to take the money from you, we must just part. 
   Don’t you find it very understandable that, when I hear you say that you can’t do anything with my work for the next few years, I then get the slight sense that, if you want to remain high and mighty on this point, there’s a rather odd contradiction if — precisely because I’m not selling, however hard I work — I’m forced to say, Theo, I’m 25 guilders short, couldn’t you let me have a bit extra, then this proves not to be possible. This is very contrary of you: when one sends you something or one asks, please, try to find an opening with the illustrated magazines so that I can earn something extra — one hears no more about it and you don’t lift a finger. But one may not say, I can’t manage on my money. And up to now — all right — but to carry on — impossible. I also want to tell you that I shan’t be asking you whether you approve or disapprove of anything I do or don’t do — I won’t be embarrassed and, if I feel like going to Paris, for instance, I shan’t ask you whether or not you object. 
   The drawback to painting is the paint bill. And at the moment I’m having a far from easy time with it. I already immediately paid out 40 guilders (80 francs) of what was sent. Moreover also paid the carpenter5 for things &c. So that if, after deduction of what you had to pay, you still had 100 francs left — I have less than 25 francs left, and although I don’t have to live on it at the moment, as you do, I still have to paint on it for a month, which, with models, with paints, is impossible this way. And I also have this pleasing prospect for January, when I’ll have to pay some more. So what I’m complaining about and why I said that it was actually most decidedly essential that I had something extra now and not later was so that I could for God’s sake at least keep working, and if I’m definitely stuck for financial reasons, it makes me very discontented. And for which I can’t then accordingly blame myself alone, because what I have to pay isn’t caused by extravagance but by working. If you can’t enter into this or sympathize, and choose to be mistrustful — well, old chap — I believe you really mean well and so — I really don’t take your mistrustfulness too much to heart. 
   Except to the extent that if you’re doing it deliberately to get rid of me, you’re truly well on the way to achieving that goal. In the past you know that I often specifically asked you that we should keep up the relationship — now I could no longer urge it in the same way. Again, I work too hard for me to have to remain for much longer in a dependent position which degenerates too much into patronage, while when I write about it in a businesslike way I don’t even get an answer. No — old chap — seeing something in it that I may continue to regard as lasting is no longer reconcilable with my sense of honour, of justice. Listen — Pa — has been very often and very seriously — mistrustful — of me. You know your side of that anyway, and I for my part perhaps know even more about it. But — nonetheless — he always called himself ‘my friend’ nonetheless — the man thought that he was right and simply couldn’t see any differently — and — so, after all — meant well
   if you will — namely. But for my part, one day I spoke out foursquare and said, don’t call yourself my friend if you think this or that of me — people who think of me like that, they’re not friends but enemies, the worst enemies as sure as 2 x 2 = 4. This also applies to you in answer to what you say about mistrust. With this distinction (which I’m willing to appreciate and take into account), Pa did not add ‘that he was mistrustful’, you add that — which makes up for a lot. Yet at bottom I still see the same thing in it. Now I don’t want to influence anything, though — and I say bluntly that on my part I don’t in the least undertake to agree with Pa or you. Be aware of that — quite possibly there’s even more than a ditch between the two. And because something of the kind is quite possible, be aware that I absolutely do not urge you to think all sorts of fine and good things about me according to your or Pa’s view of things. It might well be that mine is opposed to them in a revolutionary way. 
 0  I can’t worry about what people think of me — I must move forward, that’s what I have to think about. And so I go my way with a certain obstinacy, believing in some things and not in others. You — and rightly — set store by your position &c. — don’t you? — by making progress or not making progress — your affairs going poorly or well. Well now, know that I too shall certainly stand up for my profession with no weaker motive than you have for yours. And without going about it all too delicately, must and will persevere. And also very certainly think to keep on my studio here — like Stengelin does, for instance, who has one on the Drenthe heaths — even if he happens to live somewhere else. I’ve rented it as a refuge and it will continue to serve me as such. So — taking rooms in Eindhoven would be sheer nonsense — and I can’t even think about it. A room in Antwerp later on, all right — that is indeed my intention — but firstly I don’t have any money for it now, and secondly I still want to paint a fairly large number of heads first — with which I’ll make progress — to the extent that it’s at all possible for me to pay the models. Which in the circumstances, as you say, things don’t exactly foster. I can’t do any silly things just like that in the circumstances, and cook my own goose by breaking off here at a moment that doesn’t lend itself to it — just because you’re in a mistrustful period. But be aware of this, that if this mistrustful period endures with you and seems about to take root — even if I don’t do any silly things just like that — I’m nonetheless seriously thinking of seeing to it that we can part in peace and without damage to you or me. However, my very sincere thanks each time for what is sent, and know that if I press for a little extra — it’s precisely in order to continue until we can part, but — in peace — and without harm to you or me. 
 1  Theo. Although appreciating your proposal to add another 50 francs monthly over and above the 100 francs I asked for, intended as a contribution to Pa towards the cost of my keep, I must most decidedly refuse this (the 50 francs). If I’ve been here at home this long without paying for my board and lodging, you may regard that if you will as arrogance or tactlessness on my part. I did it for the sake of the progress of the painting, and have not profited from it myself in so far as even now I still have a fairly steep paint bill to pay, as surplus expenditure. Apart from that, I acknowledge that it has been advantageous to me after all. But the reason why I don’t think now is a suitable moment to make a sort of contract with Pa is that under the circumstances it cannot be part of my plans to intend to stay here for very much longer. Which I would like but, I must fear, will prove impossible. However, if you do want to agree something with Pa to the effect you indicate in your letter, let it be without involving me at all and 
 2  in other words a matter between you and Pa which concerns me not at all. So that I can then continue to regard the fact that I live here as tactlessness on my part in all events, thus also in the event of payment by you. When I’m better8 I’ll probably go and live in the studio, at least in the daytime. It’s too much for me all at once, losing you in this respect, and having to pay for my keep again as well. Gradually, though, I’ll see to it that I find another resource of my own accord. If it can give you any satisfaction that what you call ‘my plans for the future’ are also lying pretty much in ruins, good luck to you. However, this is still no reason for me to approve of your views in this regard, which, I must repeat, I continue to find bad. I cannot give up the studio yet — I have to have something fixed, and they can’t in any event demand of me that I leave the village. The fact that it can be foreseen that I have to prepare myself for this, though, is precisely the point that makes me regret that I didn’t already realize last year that our arrangement was unsustainable for both of us. Regards. Vincent 
 3  I must object to an underlined section in your letter — which I copy. ‘And I therefore request you, from now on, out of the 150 francs, which I shall keep on sending you, as agreed when we were good friends, it was accepted by us both to give 50 francs to Pa.’ I object to that, it’s not true that ‘when we were still good friends’ &c. we agreed that I should pay 50 francs. I remember the conversation about it — in the garden9 — very well, and far from agreeing to something, I wasn’t willing to agree to anything of that sort then, on that occasion, and it ended with my pointing out to you fairly forcefully that I needed money to get started on several larger canvases I was planning, and had other expenses enough. If anything was agreed, it was for later, when I would be more on top of things. This letter tells you explicitly that I flatly refuse to have anything to do with what you might want to agree with Pa about possible payment for board. Now in order to avoid further misunderstanding in this regard, about this 50 francs for board, I let Pa read your letter of today and this letter. I don’t want to hear any more about this matter; you settle it with Pa. I tell you once more, it’s not true I agreed to pay 50 francs for my board, if I had promised that 
 4  I would have kept to it, but I remember the whole conversation about it and it’s simply the opposite, namely that I told you that for the time being I had too much else to pay, that I couldn’t do it yet. My dear Theo, One doesn’t always have the words to lay all one’s cards on the table, but — towards you — I’m so determined — (I don’t care whether you’re mistrustful or not) — to speak out completely frankly — that with some reflection I’ve perhaps found clearer words for what I already made you feel. It seems to me that we must split up — in both our interests. Your position doesn’t — does it? — admit of our associating with each other very intimately and actively and cordially. Your position — to give just one example — doesn’t, for instance, admit of my living in Paris with you — either to study or for financial reasons — however useful and necessary this might increasingly become if things permitted. For — you, like so many others, have things to say about my person, manners, clothes, words, important enough and evidently without redress — that have gradually caused personal, brotherly relations to die and weaken over the years. Added to that is my past, and the fact that you feel quite the little gentleman at G&Cie, and I’m insufferable and an awkward customer. Enough — this is how things are — aren’t they? — and when it comes to analysis, when it comes to looking manfully at our positions — you won’t contradict me in this respect. 
   Only — yet — I don’t say this as a reproach — this isn’t the moment for it — that’s passed — I say it to make things quite clear — only I had thought that you attached enough to our not drifting all too far apart — that by being on the look-out in that area, by skilful manoeuvres, you could probably have solved this tricky question more satisfactorily. In such a way, for instance, that I could have got, I won’t say on good terms, but at least back in touch with Tersteeg and Mauve again — so that I too — like almost all other painters do — could have come to Paris once again for a while &c. But — you had a certain struggle with your conscience on that point which you would prefer to avoid. So you don’t think about it, and you’re not exactly very kind if I raise it, that point in question. In all events, you think me foolish in these matters, and always dismiss them. This is your drawback — in this respect I find you very miserable — but your good side is your reliability with the money. So to sum up — I right willingly acknowledge an obligation to you. 
   Only — failing relations with you yourself, with Tersteeg or with whoever else I knew in the past — failing these, I want something else — in compensation. For — I still have my future too — and I want to progress. If a girl won’t have me, very well, I can hardly blame her — but — nothing is surer than that I’ll try to find recompense elsewhere. So, too, with other relationships. I won’t foist myself on you nor try to force your affection — but — as a friend — let alone as a brother — you’re too cool to me. Not where the money’s concerned, old chap, I say nothing about that. But personally you’re of no use whatsoever to me, nor I to you. And we could and should have been of more mutual use to each other. We won’t quarrel now, though — things have their seasons, that of quarrelling has passed — then follows — I believe — the break-up. Remember, though, that there are people who really do love you and towards whom you shouldn’t be mistrustful, who become powerless in their sympathy because3 you’re too suspicious, precisely where you would do better to reinforce someone’s self-confidence. But anyway. I don’t consider it impossible that — Marie — you know, the one you helped when she was ill — with all her appreciation of your character and help — must have felt something of what I feel — I dare assume something of the kind instinctively. 
   Now I’ll be so free as to tell you one thing. We will part — this is a difficult transition for me — and is coupled with financial difficulties that will certainly be thorny enough for me. However — I’ll manage to survive — but I specifically demand that you, for your part, at this moment, which is critical for me, will be very frank. I know you will agree that we should part — precisely because it will be in peace. Tell me straight out whether you approve of Antwerp — keeping on my studio here in the country, which is too cheap to let go and I can’t do without in any event as a storeroom, and refuge if need be. And — if it’s not asking too much — help me to get on – financially the obstacles are worse for me at this very time of the end of the year than at other times. And I’d like to keep the transitional period short if possible, because it’s such torture to feel that one thing is disappearing — and one doesn’t yet have the other. I couldn’t help thinking about why Marie and you parted. I don’t know any details, do I? and you thought she wasn’t good. Perhaps you’re right, but perhaps, too, you didn’t understand her. And as to me, quite possibly I’m not — maybe — good in the same way — but also as to me — do you understand and feel the right way? I neither can nor will judge that. Proudhon writes, ‘woman is the desolation of the righteous man’4 — but shouldn’t there be an answer to that — ‘the righteous man is the desolation of woman’? Maybe. Similarly one could perhaps say: ‘the artist is the desolation of the financier’ and conversely, ‘the financier is the desolation of the artist’. You see — I don’t know the conclusion myself — but — I see two sides to the same question. So you know the intentions I’ve resolved upon — I hope for both our sakes that the time of transition will be short and, because I know you agree to a parting — how can we handle it quickest and most satisfactorily? With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Part — but in peace — without forcing it too much. Try to see to it that I don’t have to lose any time, that I can readily go on painting, and I’ll go on until I’m worth so much that people give me work in Antwerp in return for board and paint. I wish you could understand this, I don’t want to part through a desire to quarrel — I want to part in order to keep the peace. I couldn’t endure it if I didn’t have the prospect of other circumstances. Not financially in the first place, but that it’s more pleasant for me in the house where I live. I have nothing to complain about at home — but — I can’t settle here, and it actually appears from your own words that you can’t understand me nor I you — so — work towards parting in peace and without harm to anyone, with good heart and serenity, and without rancour. 
   But please don’t think that I want to quarrel with you or with them at home — because this is not in my character — although you imagine it is — and for that matter several others think as you do — actually the opposite is in me — the fact is I can’t endure it without more peace and cordiality. I can only shrug my shoulders at that opinion — the people who think like that about me, though, I decidedly do not exactly regard as friends, though. Even if they were my father or my brother a thousand times over — if they think like that — I’m grieved by it, but at the same time fortunately have the wit not to allow myself to be overwhelmed by it. The road in this respect is fairly well marked, I believe. Think about it, old chap — I’m not hiding my deepest feelings from you — I’m weighing up both one side and the other. You can’t give me a wife, you can’t give me a child, you can’t give me work. Money — yes. But what good is it to me if I have to do without the rest? It remains sterile because of it, your money, because it’s not used the way I’ve always told you — a labourer’s household if need be, but if one doesn’t make sure that one has a home of one’s own, art doesn’t thrive. And for my part — I told you really quite plainly enough back in my salad days, if I couldn’t get a fine woman I’d take a common one, better a common one than none. I know plenty of people who argue the exact opposite, and are as frightened of ‘children’ as I am of ‘no children’. And for my part — I don’t lightly give up a principle — even if something often goes wrong for me. 
   And consequently I’m not that afraid of the future because I know how and why I acted in the past. And because I know that there are others who feel the same as I feel. You’re mistrustful, you say — but — why, what about, and what use is this to you or me? Does mistrust make you any the wiser? I hope you know to the contrary. But then again, it’s loyal of you to say yourself that you’re mistrustful — that’s also why I’m responding to it — which would have been beneath me otherwise. And my answer is very brief — I mean no harm to you nor to Pa nor to anyone else, but I very seriously think that I might want to part from you and seek a new partnership for the very sake of preventing harm in the future. Later on we’d clash as Pa and I have clashed with each other, and then I COULD not give in. That’s all. On the one hand my duty compels me to love my father, my brother — and I do — but we live in an age of innovation and reform, and many things have changed utterly, and in consequence of this I see, I feel, I believe differently from Pa, differently from you. And because, with all this, I try to keep the abstract ideal of good separate from my own imperfect self — I don’t use big words — but I simply say — the way to remain good friends is — to part — it pains me to say this — but I’m resigned to it. 
   You’ll understand — that even though the future isn’t clear to me — I’m not afraid. And even in a very calm mood. But yet — a lot is going on inside me — and that’s partly out of a great sense of obligation, which will also remain — on the other hand a sense of disappointment that I actually find the reason why my career has to be broken in the way in which it started, namely with your help and support, so absurd. However, I would do wrong to carry on — since — if we carried on — a few years later we’d most probably have a serious quarrel that could end in hatred. Now there’s still time for me to fix myself up elsewhere — and if I have to do battle elsewhere, then at least it won’t be with my brother. And that — isn’t that viewed clearly and coolly, and calculated beforehand? 
 0  I won’t take it despondently, believe me, but equally I’m not acting wildly. I’ve found calm now that I’ve resolved on separation, and am convinced that later on, if we went on, we’d be more likely to put a spoke in each other’s wheels than help. Rappard said, don’t go to Antwerp before you’re sure you’ll find something there — but how can one know beforehand what one will encounter? And if I keep my studio on here as a refuge, then now is the time to begin. It will be there, though, so for the time being it’s certainly not my plan to leave these parts altogether. You understand, Theo — that I’ve often thought at length about it on long walks: I don’t want to get into a second series of quarrels with Pa II like I’ve had with pa I. You would be pa II. One is enough — the phrase is forthright and the centre of my ideas; draw your own conclusions. Know moreover — that I haven’t been aggressive in my actions towards Pa, nor should want to become aggressive towards you, my brother. I’ve often restrained myself — whereas I would have fought very differently and more fiercely with strangers. This very fact, though, also makes me powerless in the circumstances. Yonder I have a new field, and one where I can behave as I see fit, as stranger to stranger — yonder I have neither rights nor obligations. And can then be more brusque — willingness not to give offence, confidence to resist, that’s my ideal, and I’m searching for that so far as is in me. But accepting everything, though, will be regretted later — so — one has to act. Working here and seeking a new connection is the way forward — unfortunately money is needed for both, and the prospect of a breakthrough is poor. And — time is money, too — and — as things are now — I’m not getting any richer. But you know my motives — if I go on, you would become Pa II in my life and, although I know you mean well — you don’t understand me at all, and nothing could come of it. 
 1  I dare say — that if you were just to analyze your own feelings rather more accurately — what you call ‘mistrust’ — could actually have been something very different. Namely a sort of presentiment that something had to happen between you and me — and that otherwise it wouldn’t go well. You’re in an elevated position, that’s no reason to be mistrustful of someone who’s in a lowly position, as I am — where I also intend to stay. 
 2  If I were to drop dead — which I shan’t refuse if it comes but won’t expressly seek — you’d be standing on a skeleton — and — that would be a mightily insecure standpoint. As long as I’m painting, though, and am alive, well then you can expect from me gratitude and a feeling of obligation. But — where I feel that it’s necessary to press on with the work with vigour and that I can’t stick it otherwise, I dare to speak to you about what the trouble is. If you didn’t listen to this at the time and then started thinking badly of me — couldn’t you have analyzed that feeling incorrectly — and it actually have been a presentiment of something — that could have happened not through my doing but through your own actions and state of mind and that we would do very well to avoid? Let’s part, old chap, in a while — as friends — that can do no harm — neither to you nor to me. Staying together — that would end badly if it were to go on like this. My dear Theo, Here are a couple of scratches of the heads I’m working on — which I do in haste and from memory. I wrote to tell you how little I had left this month2 — you know how it was much the same last month. My position is — and now more than ever before — that I keep on painting just as long as I have money for the models. I can’t tell you how impatient and how distressed I become about these last days of the month, when I sometimes have to leave things that actually demand that I go on with them. I have to make 50 of these heads — while I’m still here and can get models of all types relatively easily during the winter months. Now the winter months are passing, though, without my making as many as I want and as are necessary if I don’t continue getting on with it. 
   That’s why I continue getting on with it — and must urge most strongly, if it’s even only half possible for you, that you try to cover me for the end of this month. I don’t need much, 20 francs or 30 francs will go a long way towards covering it. But that’s worth more to me at this moment than an extra 50 francs later. With hard work, these 50 heads will be finished this coming winter. But they involve so much work and toil that I need every day. And it will, I hope, be the means of making an arrangement between you and me that is better for both sides than the present one. With which, it seems to me, we should make haste — precisely to prevent   our quarrelling. Regards — if you have borrowed or can borrow, help me with this. Since I didn’t want my entire paint bill at the end of the year, I’ve already paid part of it off this month, as I said. But that the work should be delayed by it is something I can’t tolerate. I’ve had a series of drawings by Renouard from Rappard, ‘The legal world’, figures of lawyers — criminals &c. — I don’t know if you’ve noticed them — I think they’re very fine. And in my view he’s someone of the true race of the Daumiers and Gavarnis. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m very busy working on the series of heads of the people1 that I’ve resolved to make. I enclose herewith another scratch of the last one2 — I usually just scribble them from memory on a scrap of paper in the evening, hence this one. I may perhaps do them in watercolour too, later on. But paint them first. Now listen — do you remember that right at the very beginning I always spoke to you3 of my great respect and sympathy for the work of père Degroux? I think about him more than ever these days. One mustn’t look at his few history pieces — although they’re fine, too — nor in the first place at a few paintings that are in the sentiment of the writer Conscience, for instance. But one must see his Saying grace, The pilgrimage, The paupers’ pew and, above all, above all, the simple Brabant types.
   Degroux is as little appreciated as Thijs Maris, for instance. He’s different, however — but — they have this in common, that they met with fierce opposition. Now — in this age — whether the public is wiser — I don’t know — but I do know this — that it’s absolutely not superfluous to be serious in what one wants and what one does. And at this moment I could name you several new names of people who are hammering again on the same old anvil on which Degroux hammered. If Degroux — at that time — had chosen to dress his Brabant characters in medieval costumes, he would have run parallel to Leys, not just as regards genius but perhaps also — fortune. However, he didn’t do that and now — years later — people have noticeably changed their minds about the medieval — although Leys will always be Leys and Thijs Maris, Thijs Maris — and Victor Hugo’s Notre-Dame — Notre-Dame.
    But — realism — not wanted then — is now — demanded — and — there’s more need of it than ever. For that realism that has character and a sincere sentiment. I want to tell you this, that as for me, I’ll try to steer a straight course — and will paint — the dead simple, most everyday things. How, for God’s sake, is it possible that you don’t seem to be able or willing to understand that, by setting up my studio here and keeping it on for the time being, I’ve made it possible for me to have enough money for painting — and that if I had acted differently, no good would have come of it either for me or for others? Had I not done that, I would have had to muddle along for perhaps another 3 years before I had finally swallowed the bitter pill of colour and tone, also simply because of the expense. It’s now just a year since I arrived here, driven by necessity. I’m certainly not at home for my pleasure — but for my painting — and, this being so, I think it very wrong of you that you should deprive me of an opportunity if I were to leave here 
  now — before ever I have something new. I have to be here for a time for my painting — then — as soon as I’ve conquered that more definitely, I’ll be happy to go anywhere I can earn the same as I now have here. But I don’t need or deserve to go backwards — nor do I have the slightest desire to — you see? And to seek to be rid of you — I’ve never done that, but where you have only too plainly let me see how little chance there was that we’d actually do business together — I accept it for the future, that’s true. Know this once and for all, when I ask you for money, I don’t ask it for nothing — you can have the work I make with it in return, and if I’m in arrears with it now — I’m on the right road even to get ahead of it. I write this yet again for the same reason as the previous letters — I’m stuck at the end of the month because I only have enough left to pay my model for 2 or 3 days. And I’m wretched because I’ll be stuck again for 10 days, or 12, this month. And in the utmost seriousness, once again — can’t you find some way of helping me with 20 francs, say, to cover that little end? It’s my time that will otherwise not be sufficiently occupied that really pains me. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for what you sent. I appreciate your doing it, because what really matters is to do a lot of work in the winter months, when models are easier to get. In 3 days or so you’ll receive 12 little pen drawings after studies of heads. After all, I feel most at home when I work on a figure. And it also seems to me that there’s more character in, say, those heads I made back in The Hague and some other figures than in the other things I did. And it might perhaps be wise for me to concentrate even more exclusively on the figure. Only, the figure always stands somewhere, and one sometimes can’t help putting in the surroundings, their being indispensable. Ma wanted to write something here, so I’ll keep it brief, because I’m sending you those pen drawings in the next few days anyway. I don’t know in advance what I’ll do with these heads, but I want to derive the subject from the characters themselves. 
   I do know why I’m making them, though, and to what end in general. I’m curious to see that painting you got, sooner or later. I don’t exactly understand the legend itself — what it’s getting at. Why I don’t is because you say: the figure is Dantean — yet — it’s the symbol of an evil spirit that lures people into the abyss. Surely the two can hardly go together, since the sober, austere figure of Dante, entirely filled with indignation and protest at what he had seen happen — in protest at the atrocious medieval abuses and prejudices — is certainly one of the most upright, most honest, most noble that are conceivable. In short — people said of Dante, ‘there is the one who went into hell and who returned’5 — something very different to go in oneself and come out again than to 
  lure others in satanically. Consequently — one can’t have a Dantean figure play a satanic role without a huge misconception of character. And the silhouette of a Mephistopheles7 is mightily different from Dante’s. In his own time, people wrote of Giotto, ‘first he put “goodness” into the expression of human heads’. Giotto painted Dante, and with much emotion as you know, for you’re familiar with the old portrait. From which I draw the conclusion that Dante’s expression, however sad and melancholy, is essentially an expression of something infinitely good and tender. I therefore can’t imagine Satan or Mephistopheles as Dantean at all. So all the more reason why I’m curious to see what it looks like in the painting. Best wishes for the New Year. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Herewith a few more scratches of studies of heads. I heard at home that you’d had a good year — and an offer of 1, francs a month — which you had refused. I can understand that once with G&Cie, you’ll stay there — it was one of the first large houses — well then — it should still probably be able to outlive various competitors. However, I continue to maintain that it will become more difficult by the year to go on with the routine that the art trade has sustained so far, and to find a new tactic for doing business now. Will it happen? Perhaps not. And yet — unless there’s a new tactic — doesn’t the danger become more threatening by the day that, as a result of the collapse of one or other of the large houses, for instance, some things will drop and this drop will result in a panic all round? I really believe this danger isn’t just imaginary. Prices have risen to their present heights in a very short time, relatively speaking — in, let’s say, 40 years or so at most. And would it need more time than that to roll down the mountain again? As a rule, it’s easier and quicker to go downhill than uphill. And yet — there’s something in art which means that it’s always possible — there’s at least a chance to increase the numbers of the buying public. But again, will people create that new public? If not, I fear for my part that it will fall as quickly as it rose. 
   I’ve hardly ever begun a year that had a gloomier aspect in a gloomier mood, and so I don’t expect a future of success, but — a future of struggle. It’s dismal outdoors — the fields a marble of clods of black earth and some snow, usually a few days of fog and mud in between — the red sun in the evening and in the morning — crows, shrivelled grass and withered, rotting vegetation, black bushes, and the branches of the poplars and willows vicious as wire against the dismal sky. This, I see it in passing, and it’s quite in harmony with the interiors, very gloomy in these dark winter days. It’s also in harmony with the physiognomies of peasants and weavers. I don’t hear the latter complain, but they have a hard time of it. A weaver who works hard makes a piece of 60 ells, say, in a week. While he weaves, a woman has to spool for him; that is winding yarn on to the bobbins — so there are two who are working and have to live on it. On that piece he makes a net profit of, say, 4. guilders in that week3 — and nowadays when he takes it to the manufacturer he’s often told that he can only bring a new piece in a week or a fortnight’s time. 
   So not only wages low, but work fairly scarce. There’s consequently often something harried and restless in these people. It’s a different mood from that of the miners I lived with in a year of strikes and many accidents. That was even worse — but all the same, it’s often heart-rending here too — the people are quiet, and literally nowhere have I heard anything resembling inflammatory arguments. But they look as little cheerful as the cab-horses or the sheep that are transported by steamer to England. Regards — I hope you’ll be able to send; I have less than a guilder left and must have a model for several more hours today. So tomorrow I’ll be stuck again, but possibly your letter will come. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, You would do me a very great favour if you could manage to get hold of L’Illustration No. 2174 24 October 1884 for me. It’s already an old No, but they’ll still give it out at the office. There’s a drawing by Paul Renouard in it — a weavers’ strike in Lyon. Also one from a series about the Opera — of which he’s also published etchings, it says — The Harpist, which I think very good. And then he’s also just made The legal world, which I got from Rappard — you probably know it from Dumas’s Paris Illustré. But I find the drawing of the weavers the finest of them all, and there’s so much body and breadth in it that it seems to me this drawing could well hold its own beside Millet, beside Daumier, beside Lepage. When I think how he reached this height, by working from nature from the start without imitating other people, and how he’s still in harmony with the very clever people, as far as technique is concerned too, although he had his own way of doing things from the start, then I find him another proof that if one just persists in sticking to nature, it gets better every year.
   What I’m more persuaded of every day is that those people who don’t make wrestling with nature the main consideration do not get there. I think that if one has tried to follow the masters attentively, one encounters them all at certain moments, deep in reality. I mean — what are called their creations — one will also see in reality to the extent that one — has — similar eyes — similar sentiment — to them. And so I also believe this — if the critics or connoisseurs were more familiar with nature, their judgement would be better than now, when it’s the routine to live only among paintings and to compare them with one another. Which, of course, is right in its context as one side of the question, but lacks a solid basis if one forgets nature and doesn’t look deeply into it.  Can’t you understand that I may not be wrong in this — and to say even more clearly what I mean by it, isn’t it a pity, for instance, that you seldom — or hardly ever now — go into those interiors, or associate with those people, 
   or see those moods in the landscape that are painted in the paintings you find most beautiful? I don’t say that you can do this in your position — just because one has to look long and hard at nature before one arrives at the conviction that what the great masters painted most movingly still has its foundation in life and in reality itself. A basis of solid poetry that exists eternally as a fact, and can be found if one digs and searches deep enough. What does not pass in what passes, that exists. And what Michelangelo said in an almighty beautiful metaphor, I think that Millet said without a metaphor — and one can perhaps best learn to see through Millet, and get ‘a faith’. If I make better work later, I still won’t work otherwise than now; I mean it will be the same apple only riper — I myself won’t turn from what I’ve thought from the start. And this is why I say for my part, if I’m no good now, I won’t be any good later either — but if later, then now too. For wheat is wheat, even if it looks like grass at first to townsfolk — and the other way round too. In any event — whether people like or don’t like what I do and how I do it, for my part I know no other way but to wrestle with nature until such time as she reveals her secret.
   I’m still working on various heads and — hands — I’ve also drawn some more, perhaps you’ll see something in them — then again, perhaps not — what can I do about it? Again — I know no other way. But I can’t understand you when you say — perhaps we’ll also find something good later in the things you’re doing now. If I were you, I would have enough self-confidence and independent opinion to know whether or not I could see now what there was in a thing. In short — decide that sort of thing for yourself. The month isn’t yet wholly over but my purse is wholly empty — I keep working as hard as I can, and I believe for my part that I’ll stay on course just by constantly studying the model. I wish it were possible for you to send a few days before the first — for the same reason that the ends of the months are always difficult for me, because the work costs me a lot and I don’t sell any of it. This won’t go on for ever, though, because I work too hard and too much not to get at least to the point where I can cover my expenses without being in a dependent position. And for the rest, the mood of nature outdoors and the interiors here is magnificent at present; I’m doing my best not to waste time. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m really waiting for the money; I had hoped it might have been possible for you to send it a few days earlier. I’ve written to you at length about how my intention of painting 50 or so heads means that I have to incur even more expenses than usual. And since you yourself gave cause by writing that you were suspicious of me, I’m put out when I think that it’s probably more due to this than to anything else that I’m sometimes embarrassed. I wouldn’t mind that I don’t sell, if the work itself could carry on at full speed anyway. Still, I do what I can, and I’m making progress with it after all. You’ll also have to take back what you write to me about your suspiciousness.
    When — you’ll have to decide that for yourself — but I just warn you that the very worst misunderstandings come about because of suspicion. For my part, I’m sometimes upset that your character seems to have set fast in a form which I believe could cause you disquiet later. But what’s the use of talking about it? What I mean is a family ailment, it seems to me. I always imagine that in Zundert and for a few years afterwards there was generally a better atmosphere at home. Since then, I don’t feel it’s got any better. These days —  But what I don’t know is whether that former — that it was better in Zundert — is just my imagination — it could well be. But now, in any event, it’s certainly not that. Anyway. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Since this summer I can’t help always visualizing you with your lorgnette with dark lenses. This doesn’t change a person very much, you’ll say. Maybe so — but my impression is that you have perhaps, in a sense other than the literal one, acquired dark glasses in what you think and do. Suspicion, for instance. On the other hand, though, I think that it’s something to know Paris well — that if, once there, you become a Parisian through and through — analytical, steely, and what they call shrewd — I don’t want to be so petty-minded as to condemn it. I’m not like that. Be a Parisian, remain one — that’s fine, if it’s what you want. There are various things in the world that are great — the sea with the fishermen — the furrows and the peasants — the mines and the colliers. And likewise I think the pavements of Paris and the people who know their Paris well are also great.
   Now, though, you’re making a mistake if for your part you can’t understand that your suspicion of me is downright inappropriate. Most certainly I think differently, I feel differently, I act differently. But in its context it has its reason for being. And whereas you wrote to me in Drenthe, when I advised you to become a painter, that I was speaking of your affairs from a distance and I conceded as much, most certainly the reverse is also the case, namely that you can only guess at what I’m doing. So keep your suspicion to yourself, because it’s simply inappropriate. And it’s precisely in the good progress of my work that the means lie, whatever may happen about being more or less in sympathy with each other, of being at least harmless to each other, even where the ways lie in quite opposite directions. My dear Theo, I have a great deal to say about your calling my last letter ‘particularly unpleasant’. First of all this — some time ago you wrote various unpleasant things to me1  which I’ve been hearing from you and others for the past 15 years and more — that’s a long time — about relations at home. With this specially added, ‘that you are suspicious’. Well, if it had only been the former, I probably wouldn’t have given it any more attention. That addition of your suspicion, though, that was a bit too much for me, and I repeatedly asked you to take it back or to explain it, because I don’t allow something like that to be said without asking for enlightenment. And in my last letter I compared suspicion in general with a dark glass one looks through. And said that the nastiest misunderstandings arise because of it. And that’s true. When you now turn this round and write to me, ‘you remind me of the old people who say that things were better in their young days than now, forgetting meanwhile that they themselves have changed’, this doesn’t upset me. What we were talking about is suspicion, which not I but you yourself mention, by you of me. First apply the thing about the old people to that, and after that see whether it also applies to me. If it also applies to me after that — then I’ll have to change. What I wrote about a certain atmosphere at home, which I had more opportunity to observe than I cared to, is, I fear, 
   all too true. When you ask me in your letter how it is that you never hear me say, ‘I’d like to be thus or so’ — is — because I believe that those who make the greatest parade of ‘I’d like to be thus or so’ do the least to improve themselves. Those who say it, usually don’t do it. Were I to express myself about such wishes, it would not be easy to do so in an atmosphere like the one that now exists between us. So that’s the reason — and since I take pains to improve my work, I don’t have to keep lapsing into lamentations. I’m sorry you didn’t send me that No. of L’Illustration; I’ve been following Renouard a good while, and have what he’s done for L’Illustration going back for years. And this is one of the very finest, which I think you would also have been delighted with yourself. One can’t get the old Nos. if one orders them in the bookshop, at least not here. I do wish you could get it. If it’s too much trouble for you, leave it, although it’s really not that much trouble after all.
   And — after all — take note that as far as that suspicion is concerned and what I replied to it, it isn’t so much because I won’t allow you or others, if need be, to think of me exactly as you will, but I’ve warned you that it would give you little satisfaction if your character were to set in that mould. Since you repeatedly say that you know me better than anyone else and yet it still all ends in suspicion, though, this is serious enough for me to decidedly object to it, and to that ‘know so well’, and to the other thing, that suspicion. I’ve a history like that behind me with Pa — I’m not starting on a Pa II. If I’d kept on top of things with Pa from the start and not simply stayed silent, a great deal wouldn’t have happened. So don’t take it amiss that I now say foursquare what I think about it. That’s better for both of us. For the rest, old chap, I think I’m working rather too hard for it to be too long before I can 
   reduce the financial burden on you somewhat. It may take me longer than I’d like for you or for me, but keeping on working is a path that can hardly fail altogether. And when I insist on pressing on with it, it’s in order to put an end to the possibility of quarrelling. Because even the possibility of quarrelling ceases to exist as soon as I find a means of covering myself financially. Then my work will no longer be at issue, and at present it still is. And therefore don’t despair. But now it’s wretched for both of us. And for me the work is expensive; I have to paint a lot and I constantly need a model for it; just all the more reason why, at a time when the work is difficult and exacting, and at the same time thankless, it’s quite wretched to get suspicion for it. Never mind, it’s a period I have to go through, and one doesn’t paint for one’s comfort. Thanks for what you sent. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your parcel of L’Illustrations, with which you’ve given me great pleasure. I like all of the various drawings by Renouard, and didn’t know any of them. However — but this isn’t to put you to more trouble, but because I wrote things about it that are perhaps not altogether applicable to the other drawings by him — however, the actual composition by R. that I meant isn’t among them, that No. may be sold out. The breadth in the figure was superb in it — it was an old man and some women and a child, I think, who sat doing nothing in a weaver’s interior where the looms were still. I hadn’t yet seen anything from Salon 84 in reproduction, and now at least got some idea of a few interesting paintings from the Salon No. Among other things, of that composition by Puvis de Chavannes. I imagine that the Harpignies with the setting sun must have been magnificent. And the paintings by Feyen-Perrin, of which there are croquis.
   What also struck me was a figure of a girl by Emile Lévy, Japonaise, and the painting by Beyle, Women burning seaweed, and the one by Collin, Summer, 3 female nudes. I’m hard at work on painting those heads. I paint during the day and draw in the evening. I’ve already painted at least 30 or so this way, and drawn as many. With the result that I see a chance, before long I hope, of doing it very differently. I think that it will help me with the figure in general. Today I had a white and black one, against the flesh colour. And I’m also always looking for blue. As a rule, the peasant figures here are blue. That, in the ripe wheat or against the withered leaves of a beech hedge, so that the hidden nuances of darker and lighter blue are brought alive again and made to speak by contrast with gold tones or reddish brown, is very beautiful, and has struck me here from the first.
   The people here instinctively wear the most beautiful blue that I’ve ever seen. It’s coarse linen that they weave themselves, warp black, weft blue, which creates a black and blue striped pattern. When it’s faded and slightly discoloured by wind and weather, it’s an infinitely calm, subtle shade that specifically brings out the flesh colours. In short, blue enough to react with all the colours in which there are hidden orange elements, and faded enough not to clash. But this is a question of colour, and the question of the form is what matters more to me at the point where I now find myself. Expressing the form — I think — works best with an almost monochrome colour scheme, the tones of which vary chiefly in intensity and in value. For instance, The well by Jules Breton was painted in a single colour, almost. But one does have to study each colour individually in association with its opposite before one can be really sure of being harmonious.
   I painted a few more studies of our garden when there was snow on it. The landscape has changed greatly since then — we now have magnificent evening skies of lilac and gold, above the tonal silhouettes of the houses between the masses of the coppices, which are a ruddy colour, above which rise slender black poplars — while the foregrounds are blanched and bleached green, varied by strips of black earth and dry, pale reeds along the sides of the ditches. I see all that, too — I find it as superb as anyone else — but what interests me even more is the proportion of a figure, the division of the oval of a head, and I have no grasp on the rest until I have more mastery of the figure. In short — the figure first — for my part, I can’t understand the rest without it, and it’s the figure that creates the mood. I can understand, though, that there are people like Daubigny and Harpignies and Ruisdael and so many others, who are absolutely and irresistibly carried away by the landscape itself; their work is totally satisfying because they themselves were satisfied by sky and soil and a pool of water and a bush. However, I think what Israëls said about a Dupré is a mighty clever saying — it’s just like a painting of a figure. Regards, and thanks again for the illustrations. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for the prompt dispatch of the money for this month, arriving promptly like that actually helps me more. Thanks, too, for the splendid woodcut after Lhermitte — one of the few things by him that I know, for I saw only these — a troop of girls in the wheat1 — an old woman in church2 — and a miner or some such in a little bar, and Harvest4 by him, and otherwise never anything, and nothing ever as much reflecting his actual manner as these woodcutters. If Le Monde Illustré prints a composition by him every month — this is part of a series of ‘Rural months’ — it would give me mighty great pleasure to collect this whole series, and I’d really like you to send them every time. Because obviously I never see anything here, and after all I do need to see something really beautiful now and then, and so another time feel free to keep back 20 francs, say, but send me things like this when they appear in the illustrated magazines.
   Now as to when you write that if I had something ready that I thought was good, you would try to enter it for the Salon — I appreciate your wanting to do this.  This in the first place — and then further that if I’d known it 6 weeks earlier, I would have tried to send you something for this purpose. Now, though, I don’t have anything that I would care to send in. Recently, as you know, I’ve painted heads almost exclusively. And they are studies in the true meaning of the word — that is, they’re meant for the studio. Nonetheless, this very day I’ve started to make some that I’ll send you.  Because I think it possible that it might be of use, when you meet a good many people on the occasion of the Salon, if you had something you could show — albeit only studies.
   So you’ll receive heads of an old and a young woman, and probably more than one of these two models. Given what you write of your feelings about various conceptions of heads, I think that these, which come straight out of a cottage with a moss-grown thatched roof, won’t appear to you to be absolutely inappropriate, although they’re studies and nothing else. If I’d known 6 weeks earlier, I would have made a woman spinning or spooling yarn — full length — of them. To return for a moment to that question of the female heads in the Jacquet genre, not the earlier ones but of the present day. The reaction against them — certainly with a motive — by people who paint heads of girls like our sisters, for instance — I can well understand that there are painters who do such things — Whistler did it well several times — Millais, Boughton — to mention only people by whom I saw something of the sort in the past. I know little by Fantin-Latour, but what I saw I thought very good. Chardinesque. And that’s a lot. For my part, though, I’m not the sort of character who has much chance of getting on a sufficiently intimate footing with girls of that sort that 
   they’re willing to pose. Particularly not with my own sisters. And am possibly also prejudiced against women who wear dresses. And my province is more those who wear jackets and skirts. Though I think what you say about it is true — namely that it’s perfectly possible to paint them — and it has a raison d’être as a reaction against the present-day Jacquets and Van Beers10 &c. Just this, though — Chardin (let’s sum up the aim of the reaction in his name, Fantin-Latour, at least, would approve), Chardin was a Frenchman and painted French women. And in my view, respectable Dutch women like our sisters really do extraordinarily often lack the charm that the French frequently have. Consequently, the so-called respectable element among Dutch women isn’t really so very attractive — to paint or to think about. But certain common servant girls, on the other hand, are very Chardinesque. At present I’m painting not just as long as there’s light, but even in the evening by lamplight in the cottages, if I can somehow make things out on my palette, in order to capture if possible something of the singular effects of lighting at night, for instance with a large shadow cast on the wall. I’ve certainly not seen anything in the last few years as fine as those woodcutters by Lhermitte. How his little figures in that composition are felt and wanted. Thanks again for it. Yours truly, Vincent The Chardinesque is, it seems to me, a singular expression of simplicity and of goodness — both through and through, and I find it a little hard to believe that one would find it in our sisters, say, either one of them. But if Wil were a Frenchwoman rather than a minister’s daughter, she could have it. But as good as always sails to the opposite point of the compass. My dear Theo, I have a few of the heads I promised you ready, but not completely dry yet. But as I already wrote, they were painted in a dark cottage and they are — studies — in the true meaning of the word. I had already made a start on sending you study drawings in the past. It wasn’t my intention that this shouldn’t continue. I work hard and — suppose that only 1 in 10 or 20 of the studies that I make have something that makes them worth the trouble of looking at them — those few, be it more, be it fewer in number — although they’re worth nothing now, may well be later. Not so much in themselves as in conjunction with other studies. Be this as it may — I want to try it again, and so as soon as they’re completely dry and I can varnish them, I’ll send you a few heads and also a little sketch of a yarn-winder. And it certainly doesn’t have to stop there — for since I’ve devoted myself almost exclusively to painting for more than a whole year, I dare assert that these have something different from the first painted studies that I sent you. For instance, when I saw those magnificent woodcutters by Lhermitte4 recently, then I know very well that a great distance still separates me from making something like that myself. Yet as regards my views and manner of searching — that is, always directly from nature or in the poor, smoke-blackened5 cottage — seeing his work encourages me, for I see (in details in heads and hands, for instance) how artists like Lhermitte must have studied the peasant figure not only from a fairly great distance but from very close to, not now, while they create and compose with ease 
   and certainty, but before they did that. They think I imagine — it isn’t true — I remember — said one whose composition was masterly.  Now for myself, I can’t yet show a single painting, not even a single drawing yet. But I’m making studies, and precisely because of this I can very well conceive of the possibility that a time will come when I, too, will be able to compose readily. And after all, it’s difficult to say where study stops and painting begins. I’m thinking about a couple of larger, more worked-up things, and should I get a clear idea of how to achieve the effects I have in mind — in that case I would still keep the studies in question here, because then I would certainly need them for it. It is, for example, something like this:7  
   Namely figures against the light from a window. I have studies of heads for it, both against the light and facing the light, and I’ve already worked on the whole figure several times, seamstress winding yarn, or peeling potatoes. Full face and in profile. I don’t know whether I’ll get it finished, though, because it’s a difficult effect. Still, I think I’ve learned a few things from it.  Regards, I didn’t want to put off writing again any longer. Yours truly, Vincent    sudden death, come, van gogh.       Our father fatal stroke, come, but it is over. Van Gogh       our father fatal stroke. van gogh    My dear Theo, I felt as you did, in so far as when you write that the work didn’t yet proceed as usual the very first few days, I had the same experience. They have therefore been days that none of us will forget, and yet the overall impression isn’t terrible but only grave. Life isn’t long for anyone, and the question is just — to do something with it. The painting went better again today; the first two heads went wrong — today’s is a head of a young girl, almost a child’s head. As to colour, it’s a contrast of bright red and pale green against the colour of the little face; there’s already a head like it among those you took with you. I’d like to hear sometime whether those rolled-up ones arrived safely. If I thought that C.M. meant it when he asked for heads of children, I could send him this one I did today, but I can’t say I feel much inclined to enter into correspondence (unless he asks for something more specifically). It can do no harm, though, that he’s been to the studio. I don’t mind starting a new still life of those honesty heads and dry leaves against blue either, because he said something about that too. Of course I intend to keep working hard, but it’s very necessary for me to square my paint bill as soon as possible. Every other year, I’ve been able to get square at about this time and buy myself some new equipment. And this year I’ve painted so much the last few months that I actually need it more. I didn’t want to keep talking about it or contradict you much when you were here — but when you said that I would change some day and, no more than Mauve stayed in Bloemendaal for ever, would I stay here for ever either — maybe — but — I don’t see any advantage myself in moving, because I have a good studio here and the countryside here is very beautiful.
   Don’t forget that I’m definitely convinced that a painter of peasant life can do no better than follow the example of Barbizon – dwelling and living right in the midst of what one is painting, for it’s new and different outside every day. In short, the two reasons for living in the country are that one can do more work and has fewer expenses. There are about 3 months, let’s say, between now and the time you come back here in the summer. If I work hard day after day, I can have another 20 or so studies for you by then, and moreover another twenty or so to take to Antwerp if you want. But — it’s very necessary for me to pay off my paint bill as soon as possible. You know I didn’t say another word to you about it either in February or in March. But I didn’t have it easy in those months, I can tell you that. It has become colder again here. As soon as we have a few fine days, I’ll make something of the churchyard. I think the little head I made today is certainly as good as the one you have with a large white cap, which is something like this9 And could serve as a pendant to it. If you mount these two on gilded Bristol they might perhaps look good in the gold, do better than by themselves. Regards, with a handshake, and still thinking often of your visit Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m still very much under the impression of what has just happened — I just kept painting these two Sundays. Herewith another scratch of a man’s head2 and one of a still life with honesty3 in the same style as the one you took with you. It’s rather larger, though — and the objects in the foreground are a tobacco pouch and a pipe of Pa’s. If you think you’d like it, of course you’re right welcome to have it. Ma looks well, and writing many letters provides some distraction for the time being. But, of course, still very sad. Cor has just gone back to Helmond. I don’t know whether you still remember that in January, when the snow was lying on the fields and the sun rose red in the mist, I wrote to you that I’d almost never started a year in a gloomier mood. It’s certain that there’ll be a whole lot more trouble for all of us. Of course you’ll understand that it’s not for my convenience that I’ll go and live in the studio. It will make things even more difficult for me. But I’m convinced that it’s to their advantage for me to leave, particularly in view of Ma’s intention to take in a lodger this summer, if possible, who wanted to be in the country for his health — or should this not come about, then they’re still freer with regard to guests &c.
   However, I still very much regret the incident with Anna that decided me in this respect. What she said to you changed nothing of what she reproached me for, and however absurd those reproaches were and her unfounded presumptions about things that are still in the future — she hasn’t told me she takes them back. Well — you understand how I simply shrug my shoulders at such things — and anyway, I increasingly let people think of me just exactly what they will, and say and do too, if need be. But consequently I have no choice — with a beginning like that, one has to take steps to prevent all that sort of thing in the future. So I’m absolutely decided. It’s likely that Ma, Wil and Cor will go to Leiden next year. Then I’ll be the only one of us who’s still in Brabant. And I think it by no means unlikely that I’ll stay here for the rest of my life, too. After all, I desire nothing other than to live deep in the country and to paint peasant life. I feel that I can create a place for myself here, and so I’ll quietly keep my hand to my plough11 and cut my furrow. I believe that you thought differently about it, and that you would perhaps rather see me take another course as regards where I live. But I sometimes think that you have more idea of what people can do in the city, yet on the other hand I feel more at home in the country.
   All the same, it will still take me a great deal of effort before I imprint my paintings in people’s heads. Meanwhile, I have no intention whatsoever of allowing myself to be discouraged. I was thinking again of what I read about Delacroix — 17 of his paintings were rejected; ‘dix-sept de refusés’, he himself told his friends straight out. I was thinking today that they really were almighty brave fellows, those pioneers. But the battle has to be continued even now, and for my part I also want to fight for as much and as little as I’m worth. And so — Theo, I hope that we can continue on both sides what we’ve now started again. Awaiting or, rather, while I toil away on more important compositions, I’m sending you the studies as they come straight from the cottages. Of course people will say they’re not finished or they’re ugly &c. &c., but — in my view — show them anyway. For my part, I have a firm belief that there are a few people who, ending up in and tied to the city, retain indelible impressions of the country, and continue to feel homesick for the fields and the peasants all their lives. Art lovers like this are sometimes struck by sincerity, and not put off by what deters others. I know how I used to walk round the city for hours, looking in the shop windows, to see some little view of the country somewhere, no matter what. We’re now at the beginning of letting people see; I believe absolutely and utterly that little by little we’ll find a few people for it. Circumstances compel us, and gradually we’ll also be able to show better things. Now, at this moment, I’m very much preoccupied with paying off my paint bill, and moreover I need canvas, paint, brushes.
   Since you’ve had to do exceptional things for the people at home because of Pa’s death, I’ve come up with the following idea. Suppose that you don’t feel you’re in a position to give me the extra I received in spring and summer in other years, and which, by the way, I can’t do without. Wouldn’t you think it fair in that case if, when settling affairs, I were to reserve for myself a sum of, say, 200 francs of my share, which I’ll otherwise right willingly let the youngsters have? And would be able to let them have altogether if you can help me. By the way, I don’t see it as my letting them have my share — but rather that it’s because of you that they can keep my portion. If I go to live in the studio, I’ll inevitably have to have a cupboard built, for instance, because at present I have nowhere at all to store things, and I’ll also improve the light. To me, moving would be as bad as a fire — and anyway I think that we’ll stay on top of things with perseverance and effort. I think I’ll start painting in watercolour regularly in the evenings — as soon as I’m living in the studio — it can’t really be done in the living room here at home. Until then, I’ll go on working from the model in the evenings too. As to Anna — you mustn’t think that I’ll continue to take something like that amiss or hold a grudge about it — but only, it’s a shame that they think to do Ma a service with something like that — that’s a shame — and that’s stupid and unwise. As long as Ma and Wil are here, nothing unpleasant will happen between them and me; I don’t think so. Only it’s certain that Ma simply cannot comprehend that painting is a faith and that it brings with it the duty to pay no heed to public opinion — and that in it one conquers by perseverance and not by giving in. And — ‘I can’t give you faith’ is also the case between Her Hon. and me — just as it was and remained with Pa too. Anyway — I plan to make a start this week on that thing with the peasants around a dish of potatoes in the evening, or — perhaps I’ll make daylight of it, or both, or — ‘neither one’ — you’ll say. But should it succeed or should it fail, I’m going to start on the studies for the different figures. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
    See, this is what the composition has now become. I’ve painted it on a fairly large canvas, and as the sketch is now, I believe there’s life in it.
   But I know for certain that C.M., for instance, would speak of — badly drawn &c. Do you know what can definitely be said to counter that? That the beautiful effects of the light in nature require one to work very fast. Now I know very well that the great masters were able both to finish and to maintain the vitality, particularly in the period of their mature experience.  But that’s something I certainly won’t be able to do like that for the time being. At the point where I now am, though, I see a chance of giving a felt impression of what I see. Not always literally exactly — rather never exactly — for one sees nature through one’s own temperament. What I’d like to advise now is the following: don’t let the time slip by — let me work as much as is in any way possible — and keep all the studies from now on yourself. I’d rather not sign any of them yet, though, because I wouldn’t like to have them circulating like paintings, so that one would have to buy them back later should one make something of a name. But it’s good that you’re showing them, because you’ll see that some day we’ll find someone who wants to do what I’m suggesting to you, that is, make a collection of studies.
   I mean to go out regularly in the mornings and just tackle whatever I see the people doing in the fields or at home. As I do now anyway. You’re looking for new ideas for the art trade; the idea of being fair to the art lovers isn’t new, but it’s one that never grows old. So, too, giving security — on a purchase. And I ask you, isn’t an art lover better off when he has, say, 20 very diverse sketches by a painter for the same price that he would reasonably have to pay for one painting that was finished so that it could be put into circulation as a saleable commodity? If I were in your position, because after all you know a lot of young painters who haven’t yet made a name, I’d just try once to put painted studies on the market proper — not as paintings, but mounted somehow or other, on gilt Bristol, say, or black or dark red. But I spoke there about giving security. Not all painters make a lot of studies — but many do, and the young ones in particular have to do it as much as possible, don’t they? Anyone who owns a painter’s studies can be as good as certain (at least so it seems to me) that there’s a bond between the painter and him that can’t easily be broken just on a whim.
   There are people, aren’t there, who support painters during the time when they aren’t yet earning — very well. But how often does it happen that such a thing ends badly — unpleasantly for both parties? On the one hand because the patron is dissatisfied about money that’s wholly wasted, or at least seems to be. On the other hand because the painter feels entitled to ask for more trust, more patience and interest than people are prepared to give. But in most cases it’s carelessness on both sides that gives rise to the misunderstandings. I hope that this won’t be the case between us. And I hope that gradually my studies will give you some new courage. Neither you nor I are contemporaries of that generation that Gigoux rightly calls ‘the valiant ones’ in that book of yours that I read. But maintaining the enthusiasm of those days at this time is nonetheless advisable, it seems to me, because it’s often true that fortune favours the bold, and be this as it may — about fortune or ‘la joie (?) de vivre’, that is — one must work and be bold if one really wants to live. And I say, let’s paint a lot and be productive, and be ourselves with faults and qualities — I say us — because the money from you that I know causes you trouble enough to provide for me, gives you the right, if anything good happens in my work, to consider half of it as your own creation. Try to talk to someone at Le Chat Noir7 and ask them whether they want a scratch of those potato eaters and, if so, what size, because it makes no difference to me. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
    
    My dear Theo, Many thanks for your registered letter of yesterday and the enclosure. Pursuant to that, I’m writing again right away and enclose herewith a scratch, more precise than the one before, after my latest study. I haven’t been able to work it up as far as had been my intention. I painted 3 days continuously from early till late, and by Saturday evening the paint started to get into a state that didn’t allow further work. Unless it’s completely dry first. I’ve been to Eindhoven today to order a small stone, since this is to be the first in a series of lithographs, which I’m planning to start again. When you were here, I asked you about the cost of reproduction by the G&Cie process. You said then, I believe, 100 francs. Well — the old — ordinary lithographic process, thought so poorly of nowadays, is nevertheless a good deal cheaper — particularly in Eindhoven perhaps. I’m now getting use of the stone — graining, paper and printing of 50 copies for 3 guilders. I’m thinking of making a series of subjects from peasant life, in short — the peasants at home. Today I went for a splendid walk for hours with an acquaintance of mine, whose first watercolour of a figure I showed you. I don’t say that there isn’t even more stirring and more dramatic nature in Brittany, say, in Katwijk, say, in the Borinage, say — yes — but even so — the heaths and the villages here are still very beautiful, and just being here I see in it an inexhaustible resource for subjects from peasant life — and the question is just — to seize it — to work. I have a great desire to start making watercolours and drawings again, too — and when I’m living in my studio I’ll make time for it in the evenings.
   I was really immensely pleased that you sent that 100 francs. As I said, it was absolutely essential that I paid a few things — and that was preoccupying me. It’s not that people were pestering me, though, but because I knew that they were in need of it. And that’s why I wrote that I could be obliged to reserve a small part when the affairs were to be settled. But that’s not necessary, now — although I can tell you I know for sure the year will be very grim. But I just think about what Millet said: ‘I would never do away with suffering, for it is often that which makes artists express themselves most vigorously’. I’m thinking of moving about 1 May — although, of course, things are all right with Ma and the sisters — nevertheless I see and feel it’s so much for the better — for living together would become insupportable in the long run. Which I don’t so much ascribe to them personally nor to me personally either, but rather to the irreconcilability of the ideas of people who keep up a position and — a peasant painter — who doesn’t think about it. When I say that I’m a peasant painter, that is really so, and will become clearer to you in future; I feel at home there. And it’s not for nothing that I’ve spent so many evenings sitting pondering by the fire with the miners and the peat-cutters and the weavers and peasants here — unless I had no time to think — because of the work. I’ve become so absorbed in peasant life by continually seeing it at all hours of the day that I really hardly ever think of anything else.
   You write that the public mood — that is, indifference — to Millet’s work — as you just had the opportunity to see at that exhibition7 — isn’t encouraging, either for the artists or for those who have to sell paintings. I agree — but Millet himself felt and knew that — and, on reading Sensier, what he said about the start of his career struck me so much that although I don’t remember it literally, I remember the sense of it, that is, ‘that (i.e. that indifference) would be bad enough for me if I needed fine shoes and the life of a gentleman — but — because I go around in clogs, I shall manage’. And that’s how it turned out. So what I hope not to forget is that — ‘it’s a question of going around in clogs’, that is of being content as regards food, drink, clothes, sleep, with what the peasants are content with. That’s what Millet did — and — didn’t want anything else anyway — and in my view this means that as a human being he has shown painters a way that Israëls and Mauve, say, who live quite luxuriously, do not show, and I say again — Millet is — PÈRE Millet, that is, counsellor and guide in everything, for the younger painters. Most of them I know, though (but I don’t know all that many) would decline this. As to me — I think the same, and entirely believe what he says. I’m speaking about what Millet says at some length, precisely because you write about the question that when city-dwellers paint peasants, their figures, splendidly painted though they may be, nonetheless can’t help reminding one of the Parisian suburbs.
   I’ve also had that impression sometimes (although, to my mind, the woman digging potatoes by B. Lepage is certainly an exception), but isn’t it precisely because the painters are so often not deeply enough involved personally in peasant life? Millet said on another occasion — in art one must give heart and soul. Degroux — this is one of his qualities — painted real peasants. (And they — the State — demanded history pieces of him!11 — which he also did well, but how much better he was when he could be himself.) It’s an abiding shame and loss for the Belgians that Degroux still isn’t appreciated as fully as he deserves — Degroux is one of the good Milletesque masters. But even if the general public didn’t and don’t acknowledge him — and although he remains in obscurity, like Daumier, like Tassaert — there are still people, Mellery, for example, to mention just one, who are again making work today that has his sentiment. I recently saw something by Mellery in an illustrated magazine; a bargee’s family in the little deckhouse on their barge — husband, wife, children — round a table. As far as general sympathy is concerned — years ago I read something about it in Renan that has always stayed with me and that I’ll always go on believing — that anyone who really wants to accomplish something good or useful should neither count on nor wish for general approbation or appreciation, but on the contrary should expect nothing other than that only a very few hearts — and even then only maybe — will sympathize and join in. If you run into someone from Le Chat Noir, you can show them this little scratch for now, but I can make a better one if they like, because this is very much in haste and serves only to give you a clearer idea of effect and composition than the first. Regards and thanks, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent You needn’t tell Le Chat Noir that I’m also planning to make a lithograph of this thing myself. That lithograph won’t be published anyway, but is entirely private. By the way, I don’t really mind if they don’t want it — because I’ll certainly lithograph myself what I want to lithograph. 
    My dear Theo, Enclosed a few interesting pages about colour, that is, the great verities in which Delacroix believed. Add to this ‘the ancients didn’t start from the line but from the centres’; that is, beginning with the circular or elliptical bases of the masses instead of the outline. I found the right words for the latter in Gigoux’s book, but the thing itself had already occupied me for a long time. It seems to me that the more what one does is felt and has life, the more it’s criticized and gives offence, but at the same time it overcomes the criticism in the long run. What you write to me about Mr Portier certainly pleased me greatly, but the question is whether he sticks to it. Only, I know that they do exist, these certainly rather rare people who have collier’s faith4 and aren’t moved hither and thither by public opinion. That he detected personality in it pleases me very much indeed, and anyway I’m also trying more and more to be myself, remaining relatively indifferent as to whether people think it very ugly or better. That’s not to say that it would be a matter of indifference to me whether Mr Portier sticks to the opinion he has formed — on the contrary, I’ll try to make things that confirm him in it.
   You’ll receive a couple of copies of a lithograph by this post. I’d like to work up the sketch I painted in the cottage, with a few changes, into a definitive form of painting. And could perhaps be one that Portier could show or that we could send to an exhibition. At least it’s a thing that I’ve felt, and one such that I would be able to point to defects and certain errors in it myself, just as well as other critics. Yet there’s a certain life in it, and perhaps more than in certain paintings in which there are no errors at all. I also think that if it had been up to Henri Pille, Le Chat Noir might not have refused it. I’m not much bothered about it, anyway, because I want to learn to make lithographs myself so as to be independent. If I work the sketch up into a painting, I’ll also make a new lithograph of it, and such that the figures — which are now reversed, I’m sorry to say — come right again. I’m ending now so that the letter doesn’t become too bulky, because Ma’s also going to write. More later, and thanks for your letter. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   The ancients accepted only three primary colours, yellow, red and blue, and modern painters don’t accept any others. These three colours, in fact, are the only ones that can’t be broken down and are irreducible. The whole world knows that the sun’s rays break down into a series of seven colours, which Newton called primary: violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red; but it’s clear that the name ‘primary’ wouldn’t fit three of these colours, which are composite, since orange is made with red and yellow — green with yellow and blue — violet with blue and red. As for indigo, it can’t be counted among the primary colours, either, since it’s no more than a variety of blue. We must therefore acknowledge with Antiquity that in nature there are only three truly elementary colours, which, by being mixed two by two, create three other composite colours, called binaries: orange, green and violet. These rudiments, developed by modern scholars, have led to the notion of certain laws, which form a luminous theory of colours — a theory that E. Delacroix mastered scientifically and thoroughly, after having instinctively known it. 
   (See Grammaire des arts du dessin, 3rd ed., Renouard). If one combines two of the primary colours — yellow and red, for example, in order to create a binary colour, orange, this binary colour will attain its maximum brilliance when one places it close to the third primary colour, not used in the mixture. Similarly, if one combines red and blue to produce violet — that binary colour — the violet will be heightened by the immediate proximity of yellow. Lastly, if one combines yellow and blue to form green, this green will be heightened by the immediate proximity of red. Each of the three primary colours is rightly called Complementary in relation to the binary colour that corresponds with it. Thus blue is the complementary of orange, yellow is the complementary of violet, and red the complementary of green. Vice versa, each of the composite colours is the complementary of the primary colour not used in the mixture. This reciprocal heightening is what’s called the law of simultaneous contrast.
   If the complementary colours are taken at equal value, that’s to say, at the same degree of brightness and light, their juxtaposition will raise both the one and the other to an intensity so violent that human eyes will scarcely be able to bear to look at it. And by a singular phenomenon, these same colours, which are heightened by being juxtaposed, will destroy one another by being mixed. Thus — when one mixes together blue and orange in equal quantities, the orange being no more orange than the blue is blue — the mixing destroys the two tones and the result is an absolutely colourless grey. But — if one mixes together two complementaries in unequal proportions, they only partially destroy one another, and you’ll have A BROKEN TONE — which will be a variety of grey. That being so, new contrasts will emerge from the juxtaposition of two complementaries, one of which is pure and the other broken. The contest being unequal, one of these two colours triumphs, and the intensity of the dominant one doesn’t prevent there being harmony between the two.
   Because if one now brings together similar colours in the pure state, but with differing degrees of energy, for example, dark blue and light blue, one will obtain a different effect, in which there will be a contrast by virtue of the difference in intensity, and harmony by virtue of the similarity. Lastly, if two similar colours are juxtaposed, one in the pure state, the other broken — for example, pure blue with grey blue, the result will be another sort of contrast which will be tempered by the analogy between them. One can thus see that there exist several ways, different from each other, but equally infallible, of strengthening, supporting, attenuating or neutralizing the effect of a colour, and they involve working on what’s next to it — by touching what isn’t the colour itself. In order to heighten and harmonize his colours, he uses the contrast between complementaries and agreement between analogues all together, in other words, the repetition of a vivid tone by the same broken tone. My dear Theo, You’ll receive a number of impressions of the lithograph by the same post. Do give Mr Portier as many of them as he might want. And I enclose herewith a letter to him, which will seem to you — I think — rather long and consequently impractical. But I thought about it that what had to be said can’t be compressed into fewer words, and precisely what matters here is to give him reasons for his own instinctive feelings. And anyway, what I write to him, I also say to you. There’s a school — I believe — of — Impressionists. But I don’t know much about it. I do know, though, who the original and actual people are around whom — as around an axle — the peasant and landscape painters will revolve. Delacroix, Millet, Corot and the rest. This is — in my own feeling — not correctly expressed. 
   I mean — (rather than people) there are rules or principles or basic values for both drawing and colour — which one — proves to arrive at — when one finds something true. As regards drawing — for instance, that question of drawing figures from the circle — that is, based on the fundamental oval planes, which the ancient Greeks already felt and which will continue to be until the end of the world. As regards colour — those eternal questions — what, for instance, was the first question that Corot addressed to Français when Français (who already had a reputation) asked Corot (who didn’t yet have a reputation, or only a negative or fairly bad one) when he (F.) came to Corot to ask things — What is a broken tone? What is a neutral tone? Which one can point out better on the palette than put into words.
   What I want to assure Portier of in this letter is my — faith — precisely in Eugène Delacroix and those old people. And at the same time, since, for instance, the painting I’m working on5 is different from lamplights by Dou6 or Van Schendel7 — it’s perhaps not superfluous to point out how one of the most beautiful things by the painters of this century has been the painting of darkness that is still colour. Anyway — just read my letter and you’ll see that it isn’t incomprehensible. And — that it — is about SOMETHING. And that something is a question that just came into my mind when I was painting. I hope that the painting of those potato eaters will progress a bit. Besides that, am also working on a red sunset. To paint peasant life one has to be master of such an enormous number of things. But on the other hand — I know of nothing that one works on with such peace, in the sense of peace of mind, even when one has a great struggle in material things.
   Moving is causing me some considerable concern these days, because it’s never straightforward. All the same, it will have to happen, if not now then later, anyway, and in the long run it’s better to be in one’s own place, that’s for sure. To change the subject. How rightly it was said of Millet’s figures — his peasant seems to be painted with the soil he sows!9 How accurate and true that is. And how much it comes down to knowing how to make on the palette those colours that one cannot name and of which everything — fundamentally — actually consists. Perhaps — I dare say certainly — the questions of colours, and specifically broken — and — neutral — colours, will preoccupy you once more. To my mind, one hears people in the art trade speak of them so vaguely and arbitrarily. And among the painters themselves, too, for that matter. Last week I saw at an acquaintance’s10 a decidedly clever, realistic study of the head of an old woman by someone who’s directly or indirectly a pupil of the Hague School. But both in drawing and in colour a certain hesitancy, a certain narrow-mindedness, much more — it seemed to me — than one discerns when one sees an old Blommers or Mauve or Maris. And this phenomenon is threatening to become more and more general. When people conceive of realism in the sense of literal truth — namely precise drawing and local colour. There’s something other than that. Well, regards — with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Just wanted to tell you that I’m hard at work on the potato eaters. I’ve started it again on a new canvas1 and painted new studies of the heads;2 changed the hands, in particular, a great deal. Above all, I’m doing my best to put life into it. I’m very curious as to what Portier will say about it when it’s finished. The Lhermittes are superb. I adore them. It is felt, in the sense of being studied on a large and on a small scale at the same time, but above all largely imagined and broadly conceived too. I sincerely hope that you’ll keep watching out for new months in the series. Tell me, if you will, in what way I should send a painting of a larger format, and to which address. I won’t send the potato eaters unless I know for sure that it’s something. Still, it’s coming along, and I think there’ll be something very different in it from what you can ever have seen by me. At least that clearly.
   I mean the life especially. I’m painting this from memory on the painting itself. But you know yourself how many times I’ve painted the heads! And furthermore I keep going and looking every evening, to redraw sections on the spot. But in the painting I let my own head, in the sense of idea or imagination, work, which isn’t so much the case with studies, where no creative process may take place, but where one obtains food for one’s imagination from reality so that it becomes right. But you know I wrote to Mr Portier — up till now I’ve made nothing but studies — but — the paintings will come. And I’ll stick to that. I think I’ll also send a few more studies from nature soon.
   It’s the second time that I’ve derived a great deal from something Delacroix said. The first was his theory of colour, but I also read a conversation that he had with other painters about the making, that is the creation, of a painting. He asserted that one made the best paintings — from memory. By heart! he said. And I read of the conversation in question that when all those good people were going home late in the evening — Delacroix, with his usual vivacity and passion — shouted out after them in the middle of the boulevard, By heart! by heart!, probably to the great surprise of respectable passers-by. Just like Jacque who, when he had been talking somewhere, kept sending someone messages by his boy after midnight and all through the night: ‘I herewith again have the honour to assure you that your Mr Ingres is nothing but an image maker and that Daumier infinitely surpasses him’, or something of the kind.
   I shan’t send it unless I hear further from you, and anyway it’s not even finished yet. But the most difficult things, the heads, hands and ensemble, are. Perhaps you’ll now find in it what you wrote about a while ago — that, although personal, it will nonetheless remind you of other painters with a certain family likeness. Which you didn’t find in the studies then, but I suggest that if one compared my studies with other studies, there would also be a resemblance.  Thanks again for the Lhermittes and other illustrated magazines. I was disappointed in Le Chat Noir, although the title is good. I was glad to find some biographical particulars of Jules Dupré in the No. of La Vie Moderne9 — I’ve sometimes thought that Mistigris (the shrewdest of landscape painters), who appears in Balzac’s Comédie humaine, could perhaps have been Dupré in his youth. But I don’t know who Balzac had in mind, and anyway the character doesn’t play a major part in the book. Do you know who also often works in that manner of drawing with ovals that Gigoux spoke of? — Henri Pille. Do not start from the line but from the middle — is a famous truth. Meunier, Mellery and Rappard also often draw like that, and Allebé. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Sincere wishes for your good health and serenity on your birthday. I would like to have sent you the painting of the potato eaters2 for this day, but although it’s coming along well, it’s not quite finished yet. Although I’ll have painted the actual painting in a relatively short time, and largely from memory, it’s taken a whole winter of painting studies of heads and hands. And as for the few days in which I’ve painted it now — it’s consequently been a formidable fight, but one for which I have great enthusiasm. Although at times I feared that it wouldn’t come off. But painting is also ‘act and create’. When the weavers weave those fabrics that I believe they call cheviots, and also the singular Scottish multicoloured tartan fabrics — then they try, as you know, to get singular broken colours and greys in the cheviots — or to get the very brightest colours in balance against one another in the multicoloured tartans so that, rather than the fabric clashing, the overall effect of the pattern is harmonious from a distance. A grey that’s woven from red, blue, yellow, off-white and black threads, a blue that — is broken by a green and an orange, red or yellow thread — are very different from plain colours — that is, they vibrate more and make whole colours look harsh, whole, and lifeless. However, it’s not always exactly easy for the weaver, or rather the designer of the pattern or the colour combination, to work out his calculation of the number of threads and their direction — nor is it easy to weave brushstrokes together into a harmonious whole. If you saw the first painted studies that I made when I came here to Nuenen — and the present canvas — side by side — I think you’d see that as far as colour is concerned — things have livened up.
   I think that the question of the breaking of colours in the relationships of the colours will occupy you too one day. For as an art expert and critic, one must also, it seems to me — be sure of one’s ground and have certain convictions. At least for one’s own pleasure and to be able to give reasons, and at the same time one must be able to explain it in a few words to others, who sometimes turn to someone like you for enlightenment when they want to know something more about art. Now, though, I have something to say about Portier — of course his private opinion isn’t at all a matter of indifference to me, and I also appreciate to the utmost that he said that he took back nothing of what he’d said. Nor does it concern me that it appeared that he hadn’t hung these first studies. But — if he also wants me to send a painting destined for him, then he can only have it on condition that he exhibits it. As regards the potato eaters — it’s a painting that looks well in gold, I’m sure of that. Still — it would do equally well on a wall hung with a paper that had a deep tone of ripe wheat. It simply mustn’t be seen, though, without this enclosure to it. It does not appear to advantage against a dark background, and particularly not against a dull background. And this is because it’s a glimpse into a very grey interior. In reality, it’s also in a gilt frame as it were — since the hearth and the light from the fire on the white walls — 
   which now lie outside the painting but in real life throw the whole thing backwards — would be closer to the viewer. Once more, one must enclose it by placing something in a deep gold or copper colour around it. Please bear that in mind if you want to see it as it should be seen. This association with a gold tone at the same time brings brightness to areas where you wouldn’t expect it and takes away the marbled look that it gets if one unfortunately places it against a dull or black background. The shadows are painted with blue, and the gold colour works with that. Yesterday I took it to an acquaintance of mine in Eindhoven, who is painting. In 3 days or so, I’ll go over there and lift it with a little white of egg8 and finish off a few details. This man, who is himself doing his very best to learn to paint and is himself also trying to find a good colour palette, was extremely taken with it. He’d already seen the study from which I made the lithograph, and said that he hadn’t thought that I could have raised the level of both the colour and the drawing so much higher. Since he also paints from models, he also knows very well what a peasant’s head or fist entails, and as to the hands, he said that he now had a very different concept of how to do them himself. You see, I really have wanted to make it so that people get the idea that these folk, who are eating their potatoes by the light of their little lamp, have tilled the earth themselves with these hands they are putting in the dish, and so it speaks of manual labour and — that they have thus honestly earned their food. I wanted it to give the idea of a wholly different way of life from ours — civilized people. So I certainly don’t want everyone just to admire it or approve of it without knowing why.
   I’ve had the threads of this fabric in my hands the whole winter long, and searched for the definitive pattern — and if it’s now a fabric that has a rough and coarse look, nevertheless the threads were chosen with care and in accordance with certain rules. And it might well prove to be a real peasant painting. I know that it is. But anyone who would rather see insipidly pretty peasants can go ahead. For my part, I’m convinced that in the long run it produces better results to paint them in their coarseness than to introduce conventional sweetness. A peasant girl is more beautiful than a lady — to my mind — in her dusty and patched blue skirt and jacket, which have acquired the most delicate nuances from weather, wind and sun. But — if she puts — a lady’s costume on, then the genuineness is lost. A peasant in his suit of fustian in the fields is finer than when he goes to church on Sundays in a sort of gentleman’s coat. And likewise, one would be wrong, to my mind, to give a peasant painting a certain conventional smoothness. If a peasant painting smells of bacon, smoke, potato steam — fine — that’s not unhealthy — if a stable smells of manure — very well, that’s what a stable’s for — if the field has an odour of ripe wheat or potatoes or — of guano and manure — that’s really healthy — particularly for city folk. They get something useful out of paintings like this. But a peasant painting mustn’t become perfumed. I’m curious as to whether you’ll find anything in it that you like — I hope so. I’m glad that now, just as Mr Portier has said he wants to handle my work, I for my part have something more important than the studies alone. As to Durand-Ruel — although he didn’t think the drawings worthwhile, show him this painting. He may think it ugly — very well — but let him see it anyway — so that they may see that we’re putting energy into our endeavours. However, you’ll hear — ‘what a daub!’;12 be prepared for that as I’m prepared myself. But nonetheless go on giving something genuine and honest.
   Painting peasant life is a serious thing, and I for one would blame myself if I didn’t try to make paintings such that they give people who think seriously about art and about life serious things to think about. Millet, Degroux, so many others, have set examples of character, of taking no notice of the reproaches of — nasty, crude, muddy, stinking &c. &c., that it would be a disgrace if one were even to have misgivings. No — one must paint the peasants as if one were one of them, as feeling, thinking as they do themselves. As not being able to be other than one is. I so often think that the peasants are a world in themselves, so much better in many respects than the civilized world. Not in all respects, because what do they know of art and many other things? I do still have a few smaller studies — you can imagine, though, that I’ve been kept so busy with the larger one that I’ve been able to do little else besides that. As soon as the whole thing is finished and dry, I’ll just send the canvas to you in a small crate, and then put a few smaller ones in with it. I think it’s best not to delay sending it for too long, which is why I’ll send it. Then the second lithograph of it will probably have to be abandoned. But still — I understand that Mr Portier, for instance, must be confirmed in what he said, so that we can count on him as a friend for ever. I sincerely hope this will succeed.
   I’ve been so absorbed in the painting that I’ve literally almost forgotten my move, which nonetheless also has to be done. It won’t reduce my concerns, but the lives of all painters in that genre are so full of them that I wouldn’t want to have things any easier than they had them. And since, despite everything, they still got their paintings done, the material difficulties will also hinder but not destroy or weaken me. Anyway. I believe that the potato eaters will come off — the last days are always hazardous for a painting, as you know, because one can’t touch it with a large brush when it isn’t completely dry without a great risk of spoiling it. And the changes have to be made very coolly and calmly with a small brush. This is why I simply took it away and said to my friend that he just had to make sure that I didn’t spoil it in that way, and that I’d come do those small things at his place. You’ll see that it has originality. Regards — I’m sorry it wasn’t ready for today — again wishing you health and serenity, believe me, with a handshake Yours truly, Vincent Today I’ll work on a few smaller studies, which will then go at the same time. Did you ever send that Salon issue? My dear Theo, I received your letter this afternoon, and wanted to reply to it straightaway. I’m longing to get an idea of the Salon, particularly of the painting by Roll. It doesn’t surprise me that Durand-Ruel, say, haven’t yet taken notice of the drawings. And I would even prefer that Portier didn’t exaggerate in finding them good (at least, I feel I can do it better), because I’m just changing again, and in such a way that I find the earlier things hesitant. I think you’ll see what I mean from the painting of the potato eaters. I think that Portier will understand it. It’s very dark, though, and in the white, for instance, white has hardly been used at all but simply the neutral colour that occurs if one mixes red, blue, yellow together — say vermilion, Paris blue and Naples yellow. So this colour in itself is a fairly dark grey, but it looks white in the painting. I’ll tell you why I do this. The subject here is a grey interior, lit by a small lamp.  The drab linen tablecloth, the smoke-stained wall, the dusty caps in which the women have worked on the land — all these, when you look at them through your eyelashes, prove to be very dark grey in the light of the lamp, and the lamp, although being a red gold glow, is even lighter — and by a long way — than that white.
    Now the flesh tones — I know that on a superficial examination, that is if you don’t think it through, they look like what people call flesh colour.  I did paint them that way at the beginning of the painting — some yellow ochre, red ochre and white, for example.  But that was much too light and certainly didn’t do.  What was to be done? — I had finished all the heads and even finished them with great care — but I quickly repainted them without mercy, and the colour they’re painted now is something like the colour of a really dusty potato, unpeeled of course.  While I was doing it I thought again about what has so rightly been said of Millet’s peasants — ‘His peasants seem to have been painted with the soil they sow’. A phrase I can’t help thinking of whenever I see them at work, outside as well as indoors. I’m certain that if you were to ask Millet, Daubigny, Corot to paint a snowy landscape without using white — they would do it and the snow would appear white in their paintings.
   What you say about the lithograph, that the effect is woolly, I think so too, and it isn’t my own fault, in so far as the lithographer insisted that it wouldn’t print properly because I’d left virtually no white on the stone. On his advice I then bit out light areas. If I had just printed it as the drawing was, it would have been generally darker but wouldn’t have lacked cohesion. And there would still have been atmosphere between the planes. Still, what should I do with the painting? It’s as big as last year’s woman spinning. I’ve got it in the cottage again to do more things to it from life. I believe I’ll finish it though — in a manner of speaking — for I myself will actually never think my own work finished or ready. I can make a smaller version of it or a drawing, though, if you would rather have that, for I feel the thing in such a way that I can literally dream it.  Can you not understand that the thing I scribble down here was superb? When I went to the cottage this evening I found the folk eating their meal by the light of the little window instead of under the lamp.  Oh, it was astonishingly beautiful. The colour was also singular — you remember those heads painted against the window7 — the effect was like that, only darker still.
   So that the two women and the interior were almost exactly the same colour as dark green soap. But the figure of the man on the left was just lit by light coming in from a door further along. Thus head and hands became the colour of, say, a 10-centime piece, that is, dull copper. And his smock the most delicate faded blue possible, where the light caught it. When you write again, please tell me what you want me to do with the painting. Obviously we must make sure Portier gets something new. But I could just as well paint it again half size, say, for him, and send this larger one to Antwerp, say. As regards the light paintings of the present day, I’ve seen so few of them in recent years. But I’ve thought a great deal about the question. Corot, Millet, Daubigny, Israëls, Dupré, others — also paint light paintings — that is, one can see into all the corners and depths etc. — however deep the spectrum may be. But not one of them — the above-mentioned — are people who literally paint the local tone; they follow the spectrum they start with — carry through their own idea — in colour and tone and drawing. And that their lights are generally fairly dark greys — in themselves — which look light in the painting by contrast — that’s a truth that you have the opportunity to observe every day. Well, regards. You understand, I do not say that Millet doesn’t use any white when he paints snow, but maintain that, if they’d ever wanted to, and deliberately, he and the other tonists could have done that in the same way as Delacroix says of Paul Veronese — that he painted white, blonde, nude women with a colour that in itself is very like dirt from the street. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I think that you’ll certainly see in the painting that I have my own way of looking, but that it nonetheless links up with others — certain Belgians, for instance. Scandalous that they rejected Josephson’s painting. But why don’t the rejected ones band together to do something themselves? Unity is strength. My dear Theo, I’m dropping you a quick line before I send off the little crate. I’m sending it carriage paid (Antwerp) (or right through if possible) to your address, rue de Laval. If extra carriage has to be paid, it’s because they perhaps don’t do carriage paid all the way. But I didn’t want you to incur any expenses for it, since it might perhaps disappoint you. Should this be the case, then just look at it for a while. Naturally I don’t know what Portier will say. I could say things against it myself by way of criticism that would probably escape most critics. But the reason why I’m sending it with a certain confidence is that, in contrast to a great many other paintings, it has rusticity and a certain life in it. And then, although it’s done differently, in a different century from the old Dutchmen, Ostade, for instance, it’s nevertheless out of the heart of peasant life and — original. When I see in the Salon issue, for instance, so many paintings which are impeccably drawn and painted in terms of technique, if one will, many of them bore me stiff all the same, because they don’t make me feel or think anything, because they’ve evidently been made without a certain passionateness. And there’s something passionate in what I’m sending you — I’ve had a great desire to make it, and it’s with a certain fervour that I worked on it. I wasn’t bored — so perhaps it won’t bore others. I’m sending it because I believe that. How fine, though, I think Jules Breton’s The song of the lark3 in the Salon issue — the painting by Roll, also the Fantin-Latour5— also The Cornish coast, Vernier, and several others too — rest assured — I think they’re magnificent, although I can safely say that I find other apparently huge canvases dreadfully boring.
   The woman with the spade by Lhermitte, how it lives and how real it is: as if done by a peasant who can paint, it’s masterly. If I were you, I would buy copies of the Lhermittes in order to keep them for 10 years. For they are masterpieces that one gets for 50 centimes this way. How on earth is it that the illustrated magazines aren’t better! I heard Lançon is dead. I’ve followed his work for years and nothing of his has ever bored me. Life in every little scratch. When someone like that dies — of the same breed as the Régameys and Renouard — then it’s a loss and leaves an empty place. But Lançon’s drawings were admirable, so manly and so broad. I hear Tissot has an exhibition — have you seen it? It all comes down to the degree of life and passion that an artist manages to put into his figure. So long as they really live, a figure of a lady by Alfred Stevens, say, or some Tissots are also really magnificent. And the peasants by Lhermitte, Millet, are so fine precisely because of the life. Whichever school one may work in — be it Israëls, Herkomer, so many different views — if it’s felt and lives, then it’s good.
   There must be many fine paintings, among the very ones that were not reproduced. But when I think about a Salon of 70 or 74, to give an example — it seems to me that the standard was higher, and since then people have — declined. When one just looks through the Boetzel Albums, for instance. And the greatest powers aren’t even in it, Millet isn’t, for example. It’s absolutely not my intention to raise the question as if I myself knew it all. On the contrary — you see so many Daubignys, Corots, Millets, Dupré, Israëls, Herkomer, Breton &c. And I none. But every day, at present, I think about it, that the spectrum of all those painters is lower than it seems, and that when one looks at them closely and compares, even those paintings than seem light are much lower than even Mauve’s greys. With the exception, specifically, of the very finest Mauves — to mention a couple, the old one of Post’s with that caravan of old nags. And his painting at the Salon 2 years ago, dragging that pink into the sea. I hear and see so little, or nothing, so I’m not in a position to test this against the paintings themselves and see what they reveal about this question. But working and seeking myself, and thinking about it in front of nature, as I’ve written to you before, this question won’t leave me in peace. And nothing says more clearly what I mean, nowhere do I find so many grounds for my supposition, as that phrase which so accurately makes one feel Millet’s colour and technique. His peasant seems to have been painted with the very soil he sows.
   Mauve — when he paints light — and the other light Dutchmen — of good quality — use a colour mix no different from the present French or the old Dutch school — that is, a dead simple palette, but here in Holland people use more white than Millet or Dupré or Daubigny or Corot. You’d be doing me a favour if you were to write sometimes about paintings you might see. I just read a review in The Graphic of an exhibition of 25 drawings by Fred Walker. Walker’s been dead for about 10 years, you know. Pinwell too. While I’m writing about this subject I’m also thinking about their work, and how amazingly clever they were. How they were the ones who did the same in England as Maris, Israëls, Mauve accomplished in Holland, that is, restored nature over convention, feeling and impression over academic stuffiness and dullness. How they were the first tonists. But I remember peasants on the land by Pinwell15 — the Harbour of refuge by Walker16 — of which one could also say, painted with the Soil. I would have to see more paintings in order to be able to draw conclusions — and I’m just asking you, do you know anything about this? Wine, of course, contains moisture or water particles naturally — and there will always be water in it by the nature of the thing. But too much water in it — and it becomes weak. It’s by no means my assertion that one can or should paint without white or light, any more than I would ever assert that one should dry wine. I do definitely say, though, that one may well watch out a little in our so pure? and light? times that one doesn’t put too much water in the wine, too much white in the wine of colour. So that fieriness remains, and the effects don’t become too tame and weaken the whole thing.
   Do you know what people could learn something from in this regard? From a painting by Leys; not from Leys’s first period, but from the second and third periods. I remember The skaters and The walk on the ramparts from the series. In both paintings figures in the snow, and both paintings not grey at all, as light as the present Dutchmen would paint snow. That little painting by Millet that you once mentioned to me as the archetype of an Impressionist painting — is that in the Luxembourg? All the same, I think that many a Dutch landscape would become white and colourful compared with that tone. I’m convinced of this — that it’s largely painted in red, blue and yellow, with perhaps a little or some but probably not much white. I haven’t seen it in 10 or 12 years19 — yet the more I think about it, searching for certain effects in nature myself, the less I’m inclined to believe that the real French painters used as much white as people are in danger of lapsing into nowadays. I’m well aware that something also depends on the models. When I think of the Scheveningen woman who regularly serves Artz as a model, whom I remember very well, well she’s as fair, as light as — some whores. That’s good to paint, too, yes indeed. But peasants or fishermen in small villages and far from the city — wherever one may go, they’re different. They remind one of the earth, sometimes appear to have been modelled out of it.
   I remember it says in Jules Breton’s poems, and I think in the very one he dedicated to Millet (a little peasant going home through the potato fields in the evening), The peasant TWICE BROWNED  By the twilight and suntan.  But if you thought that this means I don’t like any light paintings — I really do — I know a Bastien-Lepage — a bride who’s entirely white on white with a little brown face in the middle22 — magnificent — and any number of Dutch paintings with snow, mist and sky. Magnificent. I’m just trying to say that one may do what one likes, and Jaap Maris, say, who is sometimes very light — the next day he paints a townscape at night in the most sombre spectrum. What I’m pointing out above all is that paintings like certain old Cabats, say, certain Duprés — even though they may have been painted almost solely with red, blue and yellow, without much white, nevertheless, to my mind, are not inferior to later, greyer conceptions. That was yesterday. Your letter with the enclosure just came, for which many thanks. I find what you say about the Salon interesting. I can see from what you say about the Besnard painting23 that you understood what I was talking about, about broken colours, orange broken by blue and vice versa. Only, there are other, different spectrums too. But that of orange against blue is logical, as is yellow against lilac, as is red against green. The crate for the painting is ready, so I’m sending it flat and it’s a light little crate, however it still has to dry for 1 or 2 days. I’m also sending another 10 painted studies at the same time. Please tell me something more about the UHDE painting. You know Rembrandt painted the same thing in the large painting in the National Gallery. I’m in the middle of moving. Thanks again for what you sent, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Yesterday I sent a number of painted studies1 by post, and today, Wednesday, a crate marked V1, free domicile, containing the painting. Please send me word of receipt, and at the same time whether the postage was in order. If not, I’d like to know for later consignments. If it was correct, it cost me not quite 2 guilders, which I believe works out cheaper than if one calculates the carriage in Paris, and we can try it again sometime, with fairly large dimensions too. I don’t know what you’ll think of the painting, but be it for this, be it for later canvases, be particularly careful when it comes to ordering frames.  Because for the time being we can use the money better for making new ones. And only start framing them when we’ve got a few together. At least, that would be the most agreeable to me. The expenses for the many studies that I’m making are really rather more than I can encompass in the circumstances. 
   I’ve just had to pay 25 guilders rent, as well. All the same, the painting seems to me to demand to be seen against a tone like gold or copper. Because then the marbling effect disappears and it appears that the lights are still deep. But one can easily achieve this effect by holding a piece of paper in, say, an ochre colour behind it. It wasn’t completely dry when I packed it, but I thought it couldn’t really be damaged any more. I would like to have done much more to it, though, but because of the sinking in and since it had already been lifted more than once, I could see that I had to stop. And start again on something else. My move is now complete; at home they’re rather different from what you suppose, and they say I’ve had ‘my way’. Well — it’s all the same to me, and I’d rather not talk about it. I must get to work, so adieu for today.
   I’ve had another 2 stretching frames made, the same size as this canvas. I think that once we have, say, 3 or 4 paintings of a certain size, it would then be worthwhile getting a frame made in that sort of size. But for a single one it’s too risky, and it’s better to paint a lot. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and for the 50 francs enclosed, which was very welcome to me this month in particular, what with the move. I think that I’ll save a very great deal of time in the long run by living in the studio, since I’ll be able to get started first thing in the morning, for instance, whereas the way it was at home I couldn’t do anything. I’ve been slogging away at drawings these last few days. The old tower in the fields is being demolished. There was a sale of woodwork and slates and old iron, including the cross. I’ve finished a watercolour of it in the manner of that timber sale, but better, I think. I also had a second large watercolour of the churchyard, which has so far been a failure. But still, I have a very good idea of what I want in it — and perhaps I’ll now get what I mean on the third sheet of paper. And if not, then not. I’ve just now sponged out the two failures, but I’m going to try it once more.
   If you want, though, you can have the one of the sale. Then I’m working on a large study of a cottage in the evening. And about 6 heads. One thing and another was the reason I didn’t send you confirmation of the receipt of your letter before. I’m working as hard as I can because I’m thinking of going to see the Antwerp exhibition sometime with that friend of mine in Eindhoven, if I can manage it. And then I’d want to take some work with me so as to do something more with it there if possible. I’m longing to hear whether Mr Portier has seen the potato eaters. What you say about the figures is true, that as figures they aren’t like the heads are. I’ve therefore thought about starting it very differently, that is tackling it from the torsos instead of from the heads. But then it would have become something altogether different. As to sitting, though, don’t forget 
   that these people certainly don’t sit on chairs like in one of Duval’s cafés, say. The finest thing I saw was that the woman was simply kneeling — that’s in the first sketch that I sent you. But anyway, it’s simply painted the way it’s painted, and we’ll do it again sometime — and then certainly not the same. The last few days I’ve also been busy drawing little figures. Thanks, too, for the No. of Le Temps you sent with Paul Mantz’s article about the Salon. I haven’t seen such a good article in a long time. I think it uncommonly good — the opening sentences — the painting of those Laplanders in their dark hut, who see the sun rise after the long winter night — how in art one also sits waiting for light. Then immediately afterwards his reference to Millet, who has certainly given new light — ‘and who remains’. Then pointing to Lhermitte as Millet’s successor — I think all of it manly language, and outstanding in accuracy and broad view.
   Except I think it a shame that he calls Roll ‘a beginner’14 — for that’s to denigrate him, and Roll has already made so many fine things and is — matchless. Already matchless since his Miners’ strike15 at least. When Paul Mantz says that Roll’s labourers don’t work very hard, and that it is ‘a dream’. Well now — it’s a nice conceit and there’s something to it. The only thing is that it’s precisely because it’s Paris, and not the down-to-earth work in the fields. After all, a workman in the city is just exactly the way Roll paints him. Rappard has a painting in Antwerp that I think will be very fine, at least the sketch, which practically no one liked, was to my mind very good. I think he’s very clever. Have you finished Zola’s book, Germinal, yet? I’d very much like to read it and will send it back within a fortnight or so. Is Lhermitte’s month of May in yet? In Mantz’s article I also think what he manages to say about colour in 4 words very good and logical, when he talks about ‘the ash blues that we love’, and ‘the grass of the meadow is very green, the bull is russet brown, the young girl is pink, here is the harmony of 3 tones’, when he talks about the same question in regard to Lhermitte. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I can understand that Besnard must be interesting. 
   I’ll add another word or two here — I cannot advise you enough to work out E. Delacroix’s different propositions about colour for yourself. Although — out of touch — although out of the art world for a long time — turned out — because of my clogs &c. — yet I see from that article by Mantz that there are still connoisseurs and art lovers, even now, who — know something — and that is what Thoré, what Théophile Gautier knew. And that, leaving aside the self-styled more civilized world of progress for what it is, namely a deception, it continues to come down to what the reformers already announced about taste in ’48, for instance, in a manly and forceful way. Just as Israëls won’t be surpassed here in Holland but, it seems to me, will remain the master. And in Belgium, Leys and Degroux. Don’t, whatever you do, make the mistake of thinking that I’m insisting on imitation, because I don’t mean that at all.
   You’ve seen much more than I have — and I wish that I’d seen what you’ve seen and are still looking at every day. But perhaps seeing a great deal is precisely what makes it difficult to reflect. Anyway. My assertion is just that it’s the same with you as with a mass of others, that when you’re older you have to repeat the ground rules once more and study them again. I mean that in your capacity as an art expert you have to know certain rules of colour mixing and perspective just as well as the painters themselves — in terms of theory even better than them actually — since you have to advise and speak about paintings in the making. Don’t take it amiss, for what I say is true; that this would be of more practical use to you than you might think, and would raise you above the usual standard of dealers. Which is necessary, because the usual standard is below standard. I do know a little from my own experience what the dealers know and what they don’t know. I believe that they’re often taken in and make deals that they later regret, precisely because they know too little about how a painting is made. Anyway — I know you’re already taking pains — for example by reading good things like the one by Gigoux. Really study the subject of colour etc. for yourself. I’m trying to do it myself too, and I’d also like to read everything you find of that nature. These days I’m working on putting what Delacroix said about drawing into practice on drawing a hand and arm:26 don’t start from the line but from the middle. One has opportunity enough to start from ovals there. And what I’m trying to get with it is to be able to draw not a hand but the gesture, not a mathematically correct head but the overall expression. The sniffing of the wind when a digger looks up, say, or speaking. Life, in short.  My dear Theo, I’ve just received Germinal, which I started on immediately. I’ve read 50 pages of it — which I think splendid. I also walked there once.
   Here’s a croquis of a head that I just brought back. You received the same one in the last studies I sent, the largest one among them, but painted smoothly. This time I haven’t smoothed out the brushstroke, and besides the colour is very different too. I haven’t yet made a head that’s so much painted with the soil, and more will certainly follow now. If all goes well — if I earn rather more so that I can travel more — well then I’ll also, I hope, paint the miners’ heads sometime. However, I’ll keep working until I’m absolutely and utterly sure of my case — such that I’m working even faster than now and will also be able to bring home 30 or so studies in the space of a month, say. I don’t know whether we’ll earn money, but if it’s just enough to work a tremendous amount then I’m content; doing what one wants is what matters. Yes, we must do the miners one day!
   What did Portier say about the potato eaters? I know myself that there are flaws in it; all the same, precisely because I see that the heads I’m doing now are becoming more powerful, I dare assert that the potato eaters will also hold up in association with subsequent paintings. Last year I was often desperate about colour, but now I’m working much more confidently. You must just write and tell me what you think best; whether I should keep the work I’m doing now for Antwerp or that I send it to you and Portier as soon as possible. Because it’s all the same to me. I have 7 heads6 and 1 watercolour7 ready now, so I could make another small consignment. Regards, thanks again for Germinal, I’m still reading it as I write. It’s splendid. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for sending the money for this month so promptly. I’m satisfied with what you write about the painting, the comments that they made, Portier and Serret, but that they still found good things in it. I myself have criticisms of it, and more serious ones than theirs — that about the torsos2 — so I don’t wish them to approve of the whole. When you speak to them, just tell them that it may very well be that I draw back from the present copper and green soap-like tones, but that this drawing back will, I hope, be twofold, namely that I hope to paint some in a lighter spectrum, more flesh and blood — but equally am searching for something that’s even more green soap and coppery. In reality, every day in the gloomy cottages I see effects against the light or in the evenings in the dusk that are so curious that so far my work still seems to me too light for the effects in question, that is, those I compare to green soap and the copper-colour of a worn 10-centime piece, for want of anything better, and paint them with those colours, for want of anything better. But I wanted to succeed on the gloomy side too. What I’ve talked about before: the peasant painted with the soil he sows.
   This week I hope to send to your address a little crate marked V2, containing 

1 
 painting, 
The cottage4


1 
watercolour  
ditto5


1 
,,     
Auction because of demolition6


12  
painted studies7


 among the latter you’ll find a head that I couldn’t help painting after reading Germinal. ‘Did I tell you how she died? Who do you mean? My wife, over there in Russia. Etienne made a vague gesture, surprised at the trembling of the voice, at that need to confide, in this usually impassive youth with his stoical detachment from others and from himself. He knew only that the wife was a mistress, and that she had been hanged in Moscow. Souvarine went on: on the last day, in the square, I was there... It was raining — the bunglers were losing their nerve, put off by the torrential rain. They had taken 20 minutes to hang 4 other people. She was standing waiting. She couldn’t see me, she was looking for me in the crowd. I stood up on a stone bollard and she saw me, and we did not take our eyes off one another again. Twice I wanted to shout out, to throw myself over people’s heads in order to reach her. But what was the point, one man less, one soldier less, and I could clearly see that she was saying “no”, with her great steady eyes, when she met mine’. You’ll find a variation among them — profile — a background of: ‘the flat expanse of fields of beet under the starless night sky, as dark and thick as ink’. Standing out against this the head of a female coal-pit drawer — or female thrutcher with something of a cow that’s lowing. As to expression — an individual from: — The land was big with a race of men growing like crops, a black avenging army slowly germinating in the furrows — growing taller to be harvested in future centuries and whose germination would soon make the earth explode.
   Yet to my mind the expression of that last is better in the study that I’ve marked, and which I made before I read it, in other words without thinking about Germinal, simply a peasant woman who came back from planting potatoes, still covered in dust from the field. I’m actually planning to repeat the painting of the cottage once more. The thing struck me greatly; those two cottages, half decayed under one and the same thatched roof, reminded me of a couple of worn-out old folk who make up just one single being and whom one sees supporting each other. For you see, they are two dwellings and the chimney is double. One sees that here a lot, by the way. I don’t have time, otherwise I’d like to say a very great deal about Germinal, which I think splendid. Just one more passage: bread! bread! bread! Fools! repeated M. Hennebeau, am I happy? He was stirred to anger against these people who did not understand. He would gladly have made them a gift of his high salary, in order to have, like them, a thick skin, an easy way of mating, with no regrets. Why could he not sit them down at his table, fatten them on his pheasant while he went off to fornicate behind hedges, tumbling lasses while jeering at those who had tumbled them before him! He would have given everything, his up-bringing, his comforts, his wealth, the power of his position as manager, if one day he could have been the lowest of the wretches who obeyed his orders, free in his fleshly existence, enough of a boor to slap his wife and take his pleasure with the neighbour-women. And he also wished to be starving with hunger, to have an empty belly, a stomach knotted with cramps that made him dizzy in the head; perhaps that would have killed the interminable pain. Ah! to live like a beast, to possess nothing of one’s own, to flatten the corn with the ugliest, dirtiest female coal-pit drawer, and to be able to be happy with that. Fools, these head-in-the-air revolutionaries; they would actually increase the world’s misery — they would one day make the very dogs howl with despair, when they had brought them out of the peaceful satisfaction of their instincts, in order to raise them to the unsatiated suffering of the passions.
   Now as to what you write about Portier, ‘he is perhaps more of an enthusiast than a salesman’, and that you doubt whether he can do anything with my work, it seems to me that neither you, nor I, nor he can already decide that at the moment. But when you see him, just tell him frankly that my idea is — if, after the sympathy which he expressed concerning my work, I do my utmost to send work and thus stick to my guns — I’m certainly counting on his persevering in showing my work. Tell him that my idea is that in the long run a part of the public in Paris won’t be fooled by convention, however seductive, but on the contrary that that which still has in it the most dust from the cottages or from the field will, I don’t know how or why myself, find a few very loyal friends. That he must therefore not lose heart too soon, because you and I combined won’t take it amiss of him should it not succeed for a longer or shorter time, but that he must just go on showing. And that I’ll go on sending. That if he would write down his comments for me, I believe they’ll be useful to me. And he mustn’t be embarrassed. I add here, too, that I can sometimes very much long to see the Louvre and the Luxembourg once again, and that sooner or later I really should study the technique and colour of Millet, Delacroix, Corot and others. There’s absolutely no immediate hurry, though, to my mind; the more I work the more benefit I’ll derive from it if it can happen sometime. It’s just that one needs both nature and paintings. It’s above all the question of the spectrum in which they’re set, and the breaking and opposing of colours, which I think about every day. Is Lhermitte’s month of May out already? In accordance with the postscript to your letter, I called in at home again straightaway, and I’ll also keep it up regularly from time to time, although it certainly isn’t my intention to go there often. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   I don’t know whether you noticed that there’s a tiny bit about ‘enthusiasm’ in Mantz’s articles, how there’s also something about ‘the grain of madness that is the best of art’. I know that you wrote ‘he is perhaps more of an enthusiast than a salesman, which is perhaps better’. So that’s said mildly enough on your part. For my part, though, I think that enthusiasm is certainly not irreconcilable with being a dealer. And simply remind you of Mouret and Bourdoncle. Mantz also speaks very briefly and profoundly to the point about ‘this illness that they call good sense’. What shall I say to you? — some day the future and experience will say — what I can’t find the right words for. I mean — that enthusiasm sometimes counts for more than even the calculating types who consider themselves ‘above it all’. And instinct — inspiration — impulse — conscience — guide more truly than many people think. And be that as it may, for my part I agree with it, better to die of passion than to die of boredom. It’s really curious that I still do not regard your current view as your final one.
   The document about the estate came this week. I’ve stuck to what I said straightaway at the time. Ma appeared to want it in her name, but I can’t do anything about that — I’ve stuck to what I said. I hear that a lady is coming to lodge22 — you’ll understand that it’s not pleasant for them if I’m there often, nor for me to go there often. Occasionally, from time to time, is sufficient. I find them at home (I know — contrary to your opinion and contrary to their own opinion) very far, very far from sincere, and since there are moreover several other things I can’t stand with good reasons, I believe, I think Pa’s death and the settlement of the estate is a point at which I can withdraw very calmly, since I foresee that the characters of the 3 sisters (all three) will get worse not better with time, and to me at least they’re utterly disagreeable as it is. You remember with how much warmth I wrote to you about Wil when Ma was ill. Well now, it’s been such a short burst — and it’s frozen again. Have you ever read ‘L’évangéliste’ by Daudet? If you have — then you’ll find better words in it than mine for what I’m saying.
   I can see that you’re doing your best to reconcile us, but my dear chap, I really don’t wish her any harm, and I really don’t do them any harm. Only I don’t want to exert any influence on them, since firstly they don’t understand themselves, but secondly don’t want to understand either. The old tower is being pulled down next week! The spire’s already off — I’m working on a painting of it. In these new drawings I’m starting the figures with the torso, and it seems to me that they’re fuller and broader as a result. If 50 aren’t enough, I’ll draw 100 of them, and if that’s still not enough, even more, until I’ve got what I want solidly, that’s to say that everything is round, and there is as it were neither beginning nor end anywhere on the form, but it constitutes a single, harmonious, living whole. You know that this is precisely the question that was discussed in Gigoux’s book, ‘do not start from the line but from the middle’. Mantz says: modelling is the integrity of art, and what he changes in Ingres’s words is that Ingres said, ‘drawing is the integrity of art’, and added, I would like to show the outline of a wire. Hebert had what he called ‘a horror of the line’.
   And then there are also fellows who maintain that all dogmas are absurd by the very nature of the thing. Pity that this is just another dogma itself. One simply has to do it as one does it, take care to make something of it, seek to get it to live. If people hadn’t made Thijs Maris too wretched and too melancholy to work, perhaps he would have found something amazing. I think about that chap so often, Theo, for his work is truly marvellous. It’s a pipe dream — but what a master! God! If only that chap was still as he was when he began! What a focus he would become! For the present-day Dutch school needs new people who can do something in order to come along. One shouldn’t work in the grip of fear, and many do, who are so anxious to understand their tones and colours that the fear itself makes them insipid. Well, the real fellows, Israëls or Maris or Mauve or Neuhuys, do that very differently, for they say ‘just slap it on’. Well then — because people have snuffed out enthusiasm, they’ll ‘make the dogs howl with despair’30 when no one has any enthusiasm left and no one dares to be robust any more. We’re not at that point yet — I know that, but I’m just saying — let’s retain enthusiasm, for otherwise we’ll achieve that maximum of wisdom that’s called the periwig age. One only has to look at the history of the old schools of painting to see that this can happen. How serious and bitter Mantz’s article 4 — the last one31 — was, and just what’s needed. Look out particularly for the Lhermittes when they come out. How fine they are. I spoke to Aunt Cornelie briefly; she insisted that you would certainly be coming this summer. By then I’ll have drawn a great many figures in the way I’ve now begun. Regards. My dear Theo, Today I sent off that little crate, containing 1 other painting, Peasant cemetery, besides what I already told you. I’ve left out some details — I wanted to say how this ruin shows that for centuries the peasants have been laid to rest there in the very fields that they grubbed up in life — I wanted to say how perfectly simply death and burial happen, coolly as the falling of an autumn leaf — no more than a bit of earth turned over — a little wooden cross. The fields around — where the grass of the churchyard ends, beyond the little wall, they make a last fine line against the horizon — like the horizon of a sea. And now this ruin says to me how a faith and religion mouldered away, although it was solidly founded — how, though, the life and death of the peasants is and will always be the same, springing up and withering regularly like the grass and the flowers that grow there in that churchyard. Victor Hugo, whom they’ve also just buried, said Religions pass, God remains.
   I don’t know whether you’ll see anything in these two things — the cottage with the mossy roof3 reminded me of a wren’s nest. Anyway, you must just look at them. Now I must take this opportunity of explaining to you again — which I found new, clear words for — why I wrote and write to you that I’m still far from sure whether your present view is your definite conviction. The firm of G&Cie isn’t a good school for getting to know paintings, let alone painters. I tell you this as my opinion — that one doesn’t even learn how to look independently there. Who did they greatly honour? Paul Delaroche. I don’t have to tell you how Delaroche was one of the people who really didn’t stand up to scrutiny — there’s simply no one left who takes his part. Someone else who won’t stand up to scrutiny — even though he’s better — although he did make something very fine once or twice — who will also fail — that is — Gérôme.
   His Prisoner, though, his Syrian shepherd7 are felt, and I think them as fine as anybody, and readily and willingly. But by far the most often he’s a Delaroche II. Each of them, taking into account the context of their age, is of equal worth. What I’m now asserting is — that I consider it highly likely that the whole situation will bore you more by the year. What I further assert is that one does both others and especially oneself too a disservice by being bored. In spite of many wise lessons, I’ve never seriously granted that being bored ‘for one’s own good’ can have its good, practical side. Now a MASS of people have reformed themselves at the age of about 30 and changed very considerably. Just think calmly about this — I tell you that nothing of what I learnt and heard about art at G&Cie stood up to scrutiny. How if one reverses the generalities that count there as the conversation killers in judging art — 
         namely praising the old or present-day Delaroche to the skies and discrediting the unorthodox — if, I say, one reverses certain maxims, then — one takes a breath of fresh air. In short — old chap — such curious turns in situations and affairs are possible — not only that — but even the rule. It’s funny, isn’t it — that, after all, I still doubt whether you’ll stay in the trade. You don’t have to take any notice of this or reply to it — I say it to you just to express my idea frankly, not to start futile exchanges of words. But it’s — an enchanted land8 — where one isn’t free. Anyway — I’ll hear sometime whether you’ve received the little crate and whether you find anything in it. Tomorrow I’m going to paint a thing in another village — also a cottage — in a smaller size. I found it last Sunday on a long trip I made in the company of a peasant boy9 — in order to get hold of a wren’s nest. We found 6; without doubt it was a place that Bodmer would have adored. And they were all nests from which the young had already flown, so that one could take them without too many pangs of conscience. It was so real; I also have some other splendid nests. Regards, write soon, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   I’d like you to give both the paintings a varnish before you show them to Portier or Serret. The peasant cemetery has sunk in particularly badly, because it was very different on the canvas at first and I scraped the first thing off completely. It was a total failure at first — then I gave it short shrift and started from the beginning, went and sat on another side and painted early in the morning instead of in the evening. Well, and the other — the one of the cottage — was originally a shepherd. The sheep were shorn last week; I saw it — on a table in a barn. I’m glad that this time I can show Portier something very different again. I’m busy drawing, by the way, so as to send a few full-length figures in a little while. But working on the cottages — perhaps you’ll say imitations of Michel, although they aren’t — and searching for subjects, I’ve found such splendid cottages that 
   I now really must go bird’s nesting with a number of variations of these ‘people’s nests’, which remind me so much of the nests of wrens — that’s to say, paint them. Oh — one mustn’t doubt — anyone who paints the peasants nowadays and has his heart in his work, he wins — at least a part, and not the worst although it’s not the largest — of the public. This doesn’t alter the fact that my end or second half of the month — can still work out remarkably meagre. But the same happens to the peasant lads too, and — they still have fun. I wish you’d been here on Sunday when we went on that trip. I came back covered in mud because we had to spend a good half hour wading through a stream. But for me painting is now becoming as stimulating and enticing as hunting — it is a hunt, after all, for models, and beautiful places too. Regards again, and best wishes to you. It’s already late and I have to be at the place16 at 5 o’clock, so — adieu. My dear Theo, In all likelihood you’ll have received the little crate in the last few days. I wanted to tell you that I have another similar thing, a white wattle-and-daub cottage, the size slightly more in the width. Yesterday I was at a large forest fire on a sweltering afternoon. It was a wood in the middle of a bare stretch of heath, and the sight was very singular because of the amazing masses of black and white smoke that were rising straight up. The fire confined itself to the heather, the pine needles and dry branches, though. The trunks remained standing.  I’m very busy with the figure drawings; however I’ll have to make 100 or so before I paint them, since that will save me time and money. I believe I’ll get them rounder and fuller than before. I have absolutely no money, though, and scarcely know how to get through the month.
   From time to time I can become dispirited that it will always just stay the same, selling nothing. Still, I carry on and steel myself against it. Others have borne it, too. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent Wasn’t there a contribution by Lhermitte in May? I say it again — work against indifference — perseverance isn’t easy — but things that are easy mean little. Painting peasant life is something that remains good, and the fight that others won is still going on and one can win it again. Far from there being too many peasant painters — to my mind it would be better if there could be hundreds more.
   It’s not a bad idea that in France they’re going to decorate the town halls with subjects from rural life, like a number of the paintings that were at the Salon. I do think that this will be taken still further. But — it would be even better for the peasant paintings to come into the houses, straight to the people, in the illustrated magazines and other reproductions. So when I feel discouragement it’s only in passing. I heard from home that you’d written something to them about Serret, about how he said I could be assured of his sympathy &c. Is Serret a painter, a dealer or an art lover? As of today, I don’t know. I wanted to put Germinal8 in the crate with the paintings, but in the end was afraid it might fall in among them and be damaged. I’ll put it in the next one, though, or return it by post. I think it magnificent. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and the enclosure, which is exactly what I meant and enables me to work at the end of the month just as at the beginning of the month. I was very pleased to hear that Serret is the painter about whom you had previously written things that I had really remembered, but the name had escaped me. I’d like to write much more to you than I will in this letter, but when I get home nowadays I’m really not in the mood for writing when I’ve been sitting in the sun all day. As to what Serret says, I think so too — I’ll drop him a line, because I’d like to become friends with him. As I already told you, these days I’m hard at work on figure drawings2 — I’ll send them specifically with an eye to Serret, to show him that I’m far from indifferent to the unity of a figure and the form. Do you ever see Wallis? Might the watercolour of the auction4 be something for him? If it were something for Wisselingh, then better he should take it. I once gave Wisselingh a couple of heads5 and also just sent him the lithograph. But because he didn’t send so much as a word in reply, I think that all I’d get would be an insult if I sent something.
   It just happened to me that, having not heard anything from him in 3 months or so, I suddenly got a letter from Rappard, with whom I’ve been on good terms for years, so supercilious and so full of insults and, it seemed to me, so obviously written after he’d been in The Hague that I’m as good as certain that I’ve lost him as a friend for good. It’s precisely because I tried it first in The Hague, that’s to say my own country, that I have every right and reason to forget all that unpleasantness and to think of something else outside my own country. You know Wallis well, so perhaps you could bring it up sometime apropos of that watercolour, but act as the opportunity arises. If I could earn something with my work, if we had some firm ground, even a little — under our feet, to be able to go on living — and if ever the desire to become an artisan took shape in you — let me say to make it clear — 
   in the manner of, say, discounting all the differences in age &c. — Hennebeau in Germinal — what you would be able to paint then!8 Still, the future’s always other than one thinks, so one can never know for sure. The drawback to painting is that if one doesn’t sell one’s paintings one still has to have money for paints and models to make progress. And that drawback is ugly. But otherwise — painting and, to my mind, particularly painting peasant life, gives peace of mind, even though one has a lot of scraping along and wretchedness on the outside of life. I mean painting is a home, and one doesn’t have that homesickness, that peculiar thing that Hennebeau had. The passage I copied out then9 struck me very much because, almost literally at that time, I had just such a longing to be something like a grass-mower10 or polder worker.
   And I was sick of the boredom of civilization. It is better, one is happier if one puts it into effect — but pretty much literally — at least one feels really alive. And it is something to be deep in the snow in winter, to be deep in the yellow leaves in the autumn, to be deep in the ripe wheat in the summer, to be deep in the grass in the spring. It is something to always be with the mowers and the peasant girls, in summer with the big sky above, in the winter by the black fireplace. And to feel -– this has always been so and always will be. One may sleep on straw, eat rye bread — well then, in the long run one is the healthier for it. I’d like to write more but — as I said — I’m not really in the mood for writing, and I wanted to enclose a note for Serret, which you must just read, since I write in it about what I wanted to send before long, especially because I want to let Serret see my particular figure studies. Regards, Yours truly, Vincent Serret may agree with you that making good things and selling are quite separate. But there’s no truth in that. When the public saw Millet at last, his work collected together — then the public in both Paris and London was enthusiastic. And who was it who had stood in the way and rejected Millet? — the dealers — the so-called experts &c. I ask you, would a Mouret12 have said something like that, to keep talking about business? My dear Theo, Since it’s Sunday today, I wanted to write to you again. Because I’ve neglected to say anything about the painting by Uhde, Suffer the little children to come unto me. Yes — I think it’s good — but new — it isn’t. I like interiors in bright tones with peasant children — without a mystical figure of Christ, like Israëls, like Artz, better than this, where one gets a mystical Christ into the bargain. The children are very fine characterizations — but are they better than those by Lobrichon, Frère or even Knaus, Vautier, as they used to be in their heyday? Don’t think that this isn’t saying much, because all those fellows that I mention were extraordinarily clever character artists, particularly in the past. What I have against the Uhde painting is that there’s something cold in it, like in the new brick houses and schools and Methodist churches. And — forgive me — despite the great merits of everything in the painting, it makes me nostalgic for Decamps’s or Isabey’s less orthodox manner of painting. In short, there is in the end something consumptive about it, and I think a Corot, a Dupré, a Millet is so infinitely more healthily painted.
   I’m only speaking about it on the basis of the reproduction, though; I consider it quite possible that if I saw the painting I would become more reconciled to it as far as the technique is concerned. You know how much I like those bright fellows too — but — you see — it goes too far, and Mantz puts it very well — he says, those who are always dreaming of the maximum of bright colours everywhere will find Mr Harpignies’ greens of a rather blackish intensity. So you see: that they start to regard every effect against a strong and coloured light, every shadow, as heresy — that they never seem to go for a walk very early in the morning, or in the evening at sunset, that they don’t want to see anything but midday light or gaslight, and that has to be electric! No — the effect of all this on me is that I sometimes catch myself longing to see things — well, for example, like Nuijen’s moving day, such as an old Leys, such as a Cabat — a Diaz, Lepoittevin.
         Perhaps you see nothing in this but my constant contrariness. But still I say first of all — that I think Uhde’s painting very good — only after I’ve thought it good, the aftertaste is far from entirely pleasant — at least not very encouraging in that these painters don’t usually get better in later paintings. Anyway — it really is a painting for the house of G&Cie, of their best. They also had Knaus at G&Cie, and Lobrichon too. I assure you that I don’t discard all that as a matter of course — far from it. Does it express what I mean when I put it like this: it’s a good painting from Messrs Goupil & Cie? Does it express what I mean when I say: lots — but lots of talent, as much as possible — but genius? — no. This painting of Uhde’s — is much more German (see how cleverly Mantz pokes fun at Meyerheim, ‘still-life dauber’7 in his article, did you notice that?), is, I say, much more German that it seems. Oh those wise, those new, those know-it-all people of the new progress who criticize Harpignies! I wager that you can’t stand that either — and in content they’re a new edition of Monnier’s M. Prudhomme. To speak of something more encouraging — I enclose a woodcut after Clausen, who started out fairly German but has got the better of his weaknesses, 
   just as Neuhuys also often gets the better of his. Here you are — this is why I enclose the print for you — here at last is something from English art that reminds me of work by Pinwell and Fred Walker. It’s different again from Millet — but you’ll see that, although you may look at it for a long time, it doesn’t become boring. Don’t get rid of the print, because one so seldom sees any of this rare art, which one shouldn’t confuse with Bridgman, say. And the other print, less manly as regards the conception, is mightily good as regards sentiment, and also really original. I’m working hard on figure drawings every day. I must have at least a hundred, though — or even more, before I can stop again. I’m trying to find something different from my old drawings, and to find the character of the peasants — especially those from round here. And we’re heading towards harvest — and then I must make the wheat harvest and the potato lifting a campaign time. It’s twice as difficult to get a model then and yet it’s essential, because the older I get, the more convinced I become that one can’t be too conscientious, that one must always and eternally exert oneself in what Daudet (in L’histoire de mon livre, an article by him that I read recently about Les rois en exil) calls the hunt for the model. I would also like to show Serret the studies of the harvest. So I don’t know exactly when I’ll be able to send the portfolio of studies from the model. But before too long, anyway. And I’ll also send another 3 cottages or so — painted studies like the last ones13 — before the harvest, I hope. Am I mistaken in thinking that there’s something good in the old tower? Have you already varnished it? They’re both dry enough for a coat of varnish now, and really need it because there’s something else under both of them. Do you already have some sort of estimate of when you’re coming? And aren’t there any new Lhermittes? Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I say again that there are examples, only too many, by the very bright fellows, where they later become chalky or oily. It’s because I’ve observed this so often that I have certain reservations, can’t think the Uhde painting entirely good. The two blacksmiths by Raffaëlli are very fine. My dear Theo, Thanks for the money, your letter and Raffaëlli catalogue. I think the drawings in it are masterly. What he himself also says about ‘character’ is interesting. His writing is a mixture of very simple words that come from the heart and from a nervous artistic emotion — they’re moving — and further — of words that I think Raffaëlli himself understands as little as one who has to read them. Thus it is writing full of very fine things and full of mistakes — I would rather read that than anything else. For what he’s talking about is mightily complicated. It seems to me, though, that the totality of what he says satisfies — when one has read it — and with all his strange outbursts he nonetheless says something sound and true. Theo, you mustn’t think that if I saw Uhde’s painting itself I would lose the impression I got of it. I say again that I believe this man will go the same way as Knaus and Lobrichon — namely that after a few things full of character, the very technique will play a dirty trick on him, that’s to say he’ll start working more and more correctly — and — more and more drily. 
   I find Raffaëlli, say, a painter who stands much higher — than Uhde. You don’t hear me having any pessimistic doubts about Lhermitte, do you? So I’m not someone who always doubts. On the contrary, I have a very firm faith in some people. I had never seen anything by Raffaëlli besides those two blacksmiths4 when I wrote to you about it. Raffaëlli, and above all specifically Lhermitte, though, have what Raffaëlli’s talking about, ‘conscience’. I’m afraid that that’s where Uhde’s weak spot will be. That he’ll no longer know what he wants. Anyway. Now you say that Uhde’s silvery grey is so beautiful — and that if I saw the painting I’d think differently about it. No, old chap. I’ve already seen so almighty much grey that I’m not so easily seduced by a bit of silvery grey as I once was. Painting grey as a system is becoming intolerable, and we’ll get the other side of that coin! All the same, to convince you that I want to go on seeing the good in it and am not against it, I have a grey thing going right now.
   We’ll — inevitably talk about these things again sometime. Don’t forget, though, that although I have certain reservations about Uhde, I said at the outset that I really do think this painting — as far as the main part is concerned, which is 3/4  of the painting — the children — very fine. I must get going — didn’t want to wait any longer; am dog-tired every day because I’m so far away on the heath. I’ve got some more figures. I’m sorry about what you write about the money, that you’ll be short yourself. Painting is sometimes so damned expensive, and nowadays it just comes down to following one’s own idea at all costs. We need an art with strength and vigour, says Raffaëlli, and in achieving this in the figure one has so much difficulty finding models. The time has passed, and I’m not complaining about it. Although it’s enough for a figure to be put together conventionally, academically – or actually, although many people want precisely that, there’ll be a reaction nonetheless — and I hope that will stir things up. The artists are calling for character, 
   well — the public will do the same. I assure you that I find Uhde’s Christ extraordinarily unfortunate, it won’t do — the children are good. I’m so fond of Lhermitte — Raffaëlli — because it’s thought out through and through, sensible and honest. I’ve got a few figures here, a woman with a spade seen from behind, another one bending over to glean ears of corn9 — another one from the front with her head almost on the ground, digging up carrots. I’ve been spying on these peasant figures here for 1  1/2  years and on their activities, precisely to get some character into it. So I really can’t stand a Santa Claus like Uhde put there in that little school — the little school itself is so fine, though! Uhde himself — well, I wager that he knows it too — and that he did it on account of the fact that the good citizens of that country where he lives desire a ‘subject’ and ‘something conventional to think about’, and otherwise he’d have to starve. If I find another moment one of these days when I’m not too tired to write, I’ll try to tell you how outstandingly good I find some things in Raffaëlli. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I was in such a hurry the last time I wrote. I really need the whole day at the moment, since I’m working a good 2 hours from here. I want to get a few more fine cottages in the middle of the heath. I now have four as big as the last two I sent, and a few small ones. They aren’t dry yet — and I’ll do a bit more to them at home, too. But then I wanted to send them to you at the same time as some figure studies, so you can show the latter to Serret. I wanted to tell you now, though, that for the time being, because there are now 6 or so large canvases, I plan to make only small ones. And that’s quite deliberate because — when I look back at what Raffaëlli and Mantz and other articles say — at the last Salon and in general, people are making a great many enormous canvases. One could perhaps — although I didn’t read this in any of the articles — call this Salon the Salon of the colour merchants. I wanted to send these off before you come here, because otherwise it’ll be rather a long time. And after that I’ll start working again on very different things. I think you’ll see in the ones that I’m bringing back from the heath that it’s pretty real there. The interiors are deuced fine, and I’ve now made some acquaintances among the people, where I can go. How did you get on this month as far as the money’s concerned? I hope it was better than you expected, for I was quite worried when you wrote that you would be short yourself.
   I had to pay a lot at the beginning of this month, and I’m left with precisely 5 guilders. And it’s a long time till the end of the month. While I’ll also have to pay out again next month. I can or may not do anything other than spend a relatively large sum on models. It’s the same here as everywhere else; people are far from happy to pose and, if it weren’t for the money, no one would. However, as the people are mostly very poor, and many weavers, in particular, have no work, I can still get it done. But to make what I want and, above all, get the figures better, is really a question of money. Did you read in Sensier’s book that when Millet had the good fortune to inherit several thousand francs, instead of using this — he was poor enough in all conscience — to make things a bit easier for himself — on the contrary he immediately went on a trip to his birthplace to paint the peasants all over again, and went through his whole inheritance like that — and — Millet was right. Others did the same thing — Paul Dubois, for instance, spent what he inherited from his parents on models. And was very wretched for a while because of money worries.
   I have nothing to inherit now — and I can’t suddenly do as I like. But don’t take it amiss of me when I say that if Serret and you — and in my view very rightly  want to see other things in my figures — I’ll have to spend rather more on my models. I don’t know how people manage to fill the Salon with canvases metres high by metres wide. Anyway. Among these cottages there are a few that I’ve painted much brighter, but I say again that, much as I like grey paintings, I appreciate more and more the people who are able to create the more sombre effects as well as the silver-grey spectrum. What I’ll do now is — if the month may perhaps have turned out rather better for you than expected, if you could send something more — even if it isn’t much — then I’ll send the 4 canvases. Otherwise — see above — I can’t really get them off. But in that case I’ll send them as soon as I have the money for the next month, and then in all events the figure studies before that — to show to Serret.
       These figure studies — I’d like you to bring them back with you when you come, though. For there are going to be many more that I need for painting. They’re to serve for figures that are definitely not larger than a span, say, or even less — so that what’s in them becomes even more concentrated. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I wish that the 4 canvases I wrote to you about were gone. I may work on them again if I keep them here too long, and I think it’s better for you to get them as they come from the heath. The reason why I don’t send them off is that I don’t want to send them to you with the carriage unpaid at a moment when you say that you might be short yourself, and I can’t pay the carriage myself either. I’ve never seen the little house where Millet lived — but I imagine that these 4 little human nests are of the same kind. One of them is the residence of a gentleman who’s popularly known here as ‘the peasant of Rauwveld’ — the other is occupied by a worthy soul who, when I went there, was engaged in nothing more mysterious than turning over her potato patch, but must also be able to work magic, though — at any rate she goes by the name of ‘the witch’s head’.  You remember that it says in the book by Gigoux how it came about that Delacroix had 17 paintings rejected at the same time. This shows — at least so it seems to me — that he and others from that period — were faced with connoisseurs and non-connoisseurs, none of whom either understood it or wanted to buy — this shows 
   that those who are rightly described in the book as ‘the valiant ones’4 didn’t talk about fighting a losing battle, but carried on painting. Something else I wanted to say to you is that we’ll have to paint a lot more if we take that about Delacroix as our starting-point. I must necessarily be the most disagreeable of all people, that’s to say having to ask for money. And since I don’t think that things will take a turn for the better as regards sales in the next few days, this is bad enough. But I ask you, isn’t it better, after all, for both of us to work hard even though there are difficulties attached to it, than to sit about philosophizing at a time like this? I don’t know the future, Theo — but — I do know the eternal law that everything changes — think back 10 years and things were different, the conditions, the mood of the people, everything in short. And 10 years on, a great deal is bound to have changed again. But doing something endures — and one doesn’t easily regret having done something. The more active the better, and I’d rather fail than sit idle.
   Whether Portier is or isn’t the man to do something with my work — we need him now all the same. And here’s what I think – after working for a year, say, we’ll have got more together than now, and I know for sure that my work will do better as I complete one thing with another. The people who have some feeling for it now, who, like him, talk about showing it sometime — they’re consequently useful, because after another year’s work, say, they’ll have a few more things together that will speak for themselves, even if they say nothing at all. Should you happen to see Portier, feel free to tell him that, far from giving up, I’m planning to send him much more. You must also go on showing when you meet people. It won’t be so very long before what we can show will be more important. You can see for yourself — and it’s a phenomenon that gives me surprisingly great pleasure — that people are increasingly starting to stage exhibitions of 1 person or a very few who belong together. This is a phenomenon in the art trade which I dare think has more future than other enterprises. It’s good that people are beginning to understand that a Bouguereau can’t do well beside a Jacque — nor a figure by Beyle or Lhermitte beside a Schelfhout or Koekkoek.
         Scatter Raffaëlli’s drawings about — and judge for yourself whether it would be possible to form a good idea of this singular artist. He — Raffaëlli — isn’t like Régamey — but I find him just as much of a personality. If my work stayed with me — I think I’d be constantly working over it. By sending it to you and to Portier as it comes from the countryside or from the cottages, the odd thing that isn’t right will sometimes get through — but things that wouldn’t be improved by frequently working over them will be preserved. If you had these 4 canvases and a few more, smaller studies of cottages, and someone saw nothing by me other than those, they’d be bound to think that I did nothing other than paint cottages. And likewise with that series of heads. But peasant life involves such diverse things that when Millet speaks of ‘working like a bunch of negroes’, this really does have to happen if one wants to achieve a whole. One may laugh at Courbet’s saying, ‘painting angels! who has ever seen angels!’7 But I’d just like to add, for instance, ‘justices in the harem, who has ever seen justices in the Harem?’ (the painting by Benjamin-Constant). ‘Bull fights, who has ever seen those?’ and so many other Moorish, Spanish things, Cardinals, and then all those history paintings, which are still always there, metres high by metres wide! What’s the point of it all, and what do people want with it? After a few years most of it becomes stale and dull, and more and more boring.
   But still. Perhaps they’re well painted — maybe. Nowadays, when connoisseurs stand in front of a painting like the one by Benjamin-Constant, or like a reception at a cardinal’s by some Spaniard or other — it’s the custom to say, with a knowing air, something about ‘clever technique’. But — as soon as those same connoisseurs found themselves in front of a scene from peasant life or a drawing by Raffaëlli, say, they would criticize the technique with the same air — à la C.M. Perhaps you think that I’m wrong to comment on this — but — I’m so gripped by the thought that all these exotic paintings are painted in THE STUDIO. But just go and sit outdoors, painting on the spot itself! Then all sorts of things like the following happen — I must have picked a good hundred flies and more off the 4 canvases that you’ll be getting, not to mention dust and sand &c. — not to mention that, when one carries them across the heath and through hedgerows for a few hours, the odd branch or two scrapes across them &c. Not to mention that when one arrives on the heath after a couple of hours’ walk in this weather, one is tired and hot. Not to mention that the figures don’t stand still like professional models, and the effects that one wants to capture change as the day wears on.
   I don’t know how it is with you — but for my part, the more I work on it the more peasant life absorbs me. And the less and less I care about either the Cabanelesque things, among which I would also count Jacquet, also Benjamin-Constant’s present work — or the highly praised but so unspeakably, hopelessly dry technique of the Italians and Spaniards. Image makers! — what Jacque said, I often think about it. But I’m not biased; I like Raffaëlli who, after all, paints something very different from peasants — I like Alfred Stevens, Tissot, to mention something that’s entirely unlike peasants — I like a fine portrait. Zola who otherwise, to my mind, often makes colossal mistakes in his judgement of paintings — says something beautiful about art in general in ‘Mes haines’. ‘In the painting (the work of art) I look for, I love the man — the artist.’11 There you are, I think that’s perfectly true — I ask you, what sort of a man, what sort of a visionary/observer or thinker, what sort of a human character is there behind some of these canvases praised for their technique — often, after all, nothing. But a Raffaëlli — is someone, a Lhermitte is someone, and in many paintings by virtually unknown people one feels that they were made with a will, with emotion, with passion, with love. 
   The TECHNIQUE of a painting from peasant life or — like Raffaëlli — from the heart of urban workers — entails difficulties quite different from those of the slick painting and the rendering of action of a Jacquet or Benjamin-Constant. That’s to say, living in those cottages day in and day out, being out in the fields just like the peasants — enduring the heat of the sun in the summer, the snow and frost in the winter, not indoors but outside, and not for a walk, but day in and day out like the peasants themselves. And I ask you, when you think about it, am I so wrong to criticize the criticism of the connoisseurs, who are presently fencing more busily than ever with the often so meaningless word technique (they’re increasingly giving it a conventional meaning)? When one counts all the trudging and lugging one has to do to paint ‘the peasant of Rauwveld’ and his cottage, I dare swear that this is a longer and more tiring expedition than many painters of exotic subjects, be it the justice in the harem or the reception at the cardinal’s, make for their choicest eccentric subjects. For in Paris one can get Arab or Spanish or Moorish models simply by ordering and paying for them. But it’s harder for someone like Raffaëlli, who paints the rag-pickers of Paris in their own small quarter, and his work is more serious. Seemingly there’s nothing simpler than painting peasants or rag-pickers and other labourers but — no subjects in painting are as difficult as those everyday figures!
   There isn’t — as far as I know — a single academy where one learns to draw and paint a digger, a sower, a woman hanging a pot over the fire, or a seamstress. But in every town of any consequence at all there’s an academy with a choice of models for historical, Arab, Louis XV13 and, in a word, all figures, provided they don’t exist in reality. If I send you and Serret a few studies of diggers or peasant women who are weeding, gleaning corn &c. as the start of a whole series about all kinds of work in the fields — then it may be that either Serret or you will discover faults in them which will be useful for me to know about, and which I’ll naturally concede myself. But I want to point out something that’s perhaps worth noting. All academic figures are constructed in the same way and, let’s admit, one couldn’t do better. Impeccable — without faults — you’ll already have seen what I’m driving at — also without giving us anything new to discover. Not so the figures of a Millet, a Lhermitte, a Régamey, a Lhermitte, a Daumier. They’re also well constructed — but not the way the academy teaches, after all. I think that no matter how academically correct a figure may be, it’s REDUNDANT in this day and age, even if it were by Ingres himself (apart from his Source14 of course, because that indeed was and is and will remain something new) if it lacks that essential modernism — the intimate character, the actual DOING SOMETHING. When will the figure not be redundant then, even though there were necessarily faults and grave faults in it to my mind, you’ll probably ask. When the digger digs, when the peasant is a peasant, and the peasant woman a peasant woman. Is this something new? Yes. Even the little figures by Ostade, Ter Borch don’t work the way they do nowadays.
   I’d like to say a lot more about this and I’d like to say how much I myself want to do what I’ve begun even better — and how much higher than my own I value the work of some others. I ask you — do you know of a single digger, a single sower in the old Dutch school??? Did they ever try to make ‘a labourer’? Did Velázquez try it in his water-carrier? Or his folk types? No. Work, that’s what the figures in the old paintings don’t do. These days I’m slogging away at a woman whom I saw last winter, lifting carrots in the snow. There it is — Millet did it, Lhermitte, and in general the peasant painters of this century — an Israëls — they find that more beautiful than anything else. But even in this century, how relatively few there are among the legion of painters who want the figure — yes — above all — for the sake of the figure (i.e. for the sake of form and modelling) but can’t conceive of it other than working, and also have the need — which the old masters avoided, as did the old Dutch masters who depicted so many conventional actions — and — I say — have the need to paint the action for the action’s sake. So that the painting or the drawing is a figure drawing for the sake of the figure and the inexpressibly harmonic form of the human body — yet at the same time — is lifting carrots in the snow. Am I expressing myself clearly? I hope so, and just say this to Serret — I can say it in fewer words — a nude figure by Cabanel, a lady by Jacquet and a peasant woman not by Bastien-Lepage himself, but a peasant woman by a Parisian who learnt to draw at the academy, will always show the limbs and the structure of the body in the same way — sometimes charmingly — correct — in proportion and anatomy. But when Israëls or when Daumier or Lhermitte, say, 
       0  draw a figure, one will feel the form of the body much more and yet — this is why I particularly want to include Daumier — the proportions will sometimes be almost random, the anatomy and structure often completely wrong ‘in the eyes of the academicians’. But it will live. And above all Delacroix, too. It still isn’t expressed properly. Tell Serret that I would be desperate if my figures were good, tell him that I don’t want them academically correct. Tell him that I mean that if one photographs a digger, then he would certainly not be digging. Tell him that I think Michelangelo’s figures magnificent, even though the legs are definitely too long — the hips and buttocks too broad. Tell him that in my view Millet and Lhermitte are consequently the true painters, because they don’t paint things as they are, examined drily and analytically, but as they, Millet, Lhermitte, Michelangelo, feel them. Tell him that my great desire is to learn to make such inaccuracies, such variations, reworkings, alterations of the reality, that it might become, very well — lies if you will — but — truer than the literal truth. And now I must close soon — I did need, though, just to talk about the fact that those who paint the life of the peasants or the common people, although they aren’t counted among the men of the world — will still, however, perhaps endure better in the long run than the makers of the exotic but painted in Paris harems and cardinals’ receptions. I know that it’s being a disagreeable person when one’s in need of money at inconvenient times — but my excuse is just that painting the seemingly most everyday things is sometimes the most difficult and most expensive.
 1  The expenses that I must incur if I want to work are sometimes very heavy in relation to my means. I assure you that if my constitution weren’t becoming virtually like that of a peasant as a result of wind and weather, I wouldn’t stick it out, for there’s simply nothing left over for my own comfort. But I don’t desire that for myself either, any more than many peasants desire to live other than as they live. But what I do ask is both for paint and, above all, for models. You’ll perhaps realize from what I say about the figure drawings that I’m positively passionate about going on with them. You recently wrote to me that Serret had spoken to you ‘with conviction’ about certain faults in the structure of the figures of the potato eaters. But you’ll have been able to see from my answer that my own criticism also condemns them, considered from that point of view, only I’ve pointed out how this was an impression I had after I’d seen the cottage in the dim lamplight on many evenings, after having painted 40 heads, from which it follows that I was starting from a different point of view. Now we’ve started talking about the figure, though, I have a great deal to say. I find in Raffaëlli’s words, his perception about ‘Character’, what he says about that is good — and in its place — and clarified by the drawings themselves. People who move in artistic and literary circles, though, as Raffaëlli does in Paris, think differently after all from, say, the way I do out in the country among the peasants. I mean they search for one word that sums up all their ideas — he suggests the word ‘Character’ for the figures of the future. I agree with it, with the intention — I believe — but I believe as little in the accuracy of the word as in the accuracy of other words — as little as in the accuracy or appositeness of my own expressions.
 2   Rather than saying there has to be character in a digger — I describe it by saying this peasant has to be a peasant, this digger has to dig, and then there’s something in it that is essentially modern. But I feel that people can draw conclusions I don’t mean even from these words — even were I to add a whole list. Instead of reducing the expenses for models — which are already quite a burden on me — I think it would be desirable — very desirable — if I could increase them a little. Because I’m concerned with something very different from being able to do ‘a little figure’ drawing.  Showing the figure of the peasant in action, you see that’s what a figure is — I repeat — essentially modern — the heart of modern art itself — that which neither the Greeks, nor the Renaissance, nor the old Dutch school have done. To me, this is a matter I think about every day. However, this difference between both the great and the lesser masters of the present (the great, for instance Millet, Lhermitte, Breton, Herkomer; the lesser, for instance Raffaëlli and Régamey) and the old schools isn’t something I’ve often found expressed truly forthrightly in articles on art. Just think about whether you don’t find it’s true, though. The figure of the peasant and the workman started more as a ‘genre’ — but nowadays, with Millet in the van as the eternal master, it’s the very heart of modern art and will remain so. People like Daumier — one has to respect them because they’re among the pioneers. The simple nude but modern figure ranks high — as revived by Henner and Lefebvre, Baudry and, above all, the sculptors like a Mercier, Dalou, they’re also among the very soundest. But peasants and labourers simply aren’t nude, and so one doesn’t have to think nude. The more people who start making figures of workmen and peasants the better I’ll like it. And I myself, I know of nothing else in which I take so much delight. This is a long letter and I still don’t know whether I’ve said what I mean clearly enough. I may perhaps drop Serret a line. If I do, I’ll send the letter to you to read, because I want to make it clear how much I attach to this question of the figure. My dear Theo, I had a visit today from Wenckebach, a painter from Utrecht who sees Rappard every day. He makes landscapes and I’ve often heard his name mentioned, and he got a medal in London at the same time as Rappard. He has seen my work — those cottages I have for you, and the figure drawings too. I talked to him about the fact that to my regret I’d had trouble with Rappard, which I could hardly explain otherwise than that he’d been prattling about my work with other people from The Hague, and that since, moreover, he hadn’t seen anything in a long time, he couldn’t help got his head stuffed full there. I showed Wenckebach figures that Rappard thought good in the past, and at the same time those that I’m doing now, and pointed out to him how I’d changed in a few things and would change even more, but that what I was looking for now was certainly not inferior. Then he said that he didn’t doubt that Rappard would take back what he had written to me.
   I also showed him how, as regards the colour, I’m not predisposed to always paint darkly. A couple of the cottages are actually very light.  But that I’m concerned with taking the primary colours red, blue, yellow, as starting-points, as points of departure, and not grey. Then we talked quite a bit about colour, and he said among other things that he’d noticed that in old watercolours Jaap Maris had also used ruddy, brown-grey, red tones, and rather a lot in fact — so that if one were to hold it next to one of his present drawings it would look completely red. And the same about Israëls, too. I may be doing more harm than good by telling you this, because it’s part of a conversation, and I actually ought to tell all of it. But we’ve spoken of it before, and so you may well understand it anyway, in its context. To get an honest, sound coloration, to sustain it, it’s advisable — and particularly in this day and age, now imitators of the great, grey fellows (not the masters themselves) want more and more, always and everywhere, to paint everything light — to practise in the more powerful spectrums and to persevere in using them, since the actual colourists always on the colours3
   Thus Wenckebach said, for instance, that he liked the thing of the old tower, which I painted last year with a lot of bitumen in it, and thought it was beyond the paint. He said he found the whole thing original. Other old things, too, that water mill, ox-plough, avenue of autumn trees. But what pleased me most was that he thought the figures good — he called them Millet-like. I know for sure, though, that I’ll get them even better if I just have some luck with the expenses and can carry on working hard on them. I’m rather worried about that, though, and as for this month — I’m absolutely broke — I haven’t a guilder left. We’ll have a hard time — but don’t blame me too much, for with perseverance there’s still a good chance later of reaping what we sow. I’m worried enough about your money troubles, though, I wish I could lighten them a little for you. When you come to Holland — shouldn’t you try to approach Tersteeg again? Tersteeg is someone who dares, provided he’s convinced — he’s all right. And Mauve likewise. If the fellows who persevered in studying the figure were very numerous, I’d say there would be little chance of finding some help.
   But they’re not so very numerous — and they’re no less necessary than in the past. It’s hard for you to keep going on your own, and I can’t do anything to reduce the expenses — on the contrary, I wish I could take more models. What’s to be done? One mustn’t say it’s fighting a losing battle, because others have won it, and we’ll win it too. As for Rappard, I’ve just written to tell him that I want him to retract his letter once and for all. You see, though, Theo, how it comes down to sticking to one’s guns in one’s work. I wrote to Rappard that we really do have something else to fight besides each other, and that at this moment the fellows who paint peasants and the common people must join hands, because unity is strength. One can’t do it alone, at any rate; a whole troop who agree can do more. Keep your spirits up, too, for perhaps we’ll get more friends, and then it will liven up, and the squabbling among us might perhaps become a peasant battle against the sort of painters one can still point out in all juries nowadays, who even now would try to stifle the ideas for which Millet was the pioneer if they could. Regards — but send me something if you can, even if it’s only ten francs, to see me through. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just a word to bid you good-day. I hope it will be convenient for you and your friend Bonger to look in on me this afternoon before you eat, so — let’s say between 3 and 5. I thought this would perhaps work out best — since then they’ll still have you at home the whole evening. I’m rather busy, since they’re harvesting the wheat in the fields and, as you know, this takes only a few days and is certainly almost the most beautiful of all. But I’ll make sure to be in my studio today between 3 and 5. In the evening I’ll drop in at Ma’s for a talk. But for the rest, you mustn’t take it amiss of me if I keep on working. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, What very much distresses me in our conversation is that when I say that I fear it will be tight for you this year, you reply: ‘that you observe that I’d like to see that’, ‘that you see very well that you can’t rely on me’, ‘that you know very well that I would be returning you no thanks for your pains’. This is not so, and it distresses me that this is how you see it. My suggestion has been this — don’t regard my little painting business as dead weight and don’t treat it harshly, for the reason that it could prove to be a little boat in a disaster when the big ship is lost. My suggestion is and remains — let’s at any rate keep that little boat in good condition and ready to sail, whether the storm comes or my anxiety proves to be unfounded. At the moment I’m a little vessel which you have in tow and once in a while can only seem to you to be dead weight. Which, by the way — as dead weight — you can leave behind by cutting the rope if you want to. But in this case I, who am the skipper of my small craft, ask 
   that far from having the tow-rope cut, my little craft should be caulked and provisioned so that it may do better service in time of need. Should you doubt the good faith of this request, then for my part I can do nothing but repeat it more emphatically. For I notice that on the side of the paint bill, my own little craft is springing leaks here and there. I’m plugging these leaks as much as I can, though, and am not yet losing my cool-headedness. Am not desperate either. But since we’ll perhaps both be in the same storm, I speak emphatically and, I believe, in both our interests. I can sum up your answer to my question thus: ‘there may be a storm coming but, even in that case, don’t count on either caulking or provisions, and be aware that I may be compelled by the force of circumstances to cut the tow-rope’.
   I can take this answer as a warning, but only in so far as it’s not accompanied by suspicion of my good faith. But — by means of this letter I cry out to you again that my request for reinforcement may prove to be in both our interests, and I’m not doing it just out of selfishness, as you assume. That in the event of a storm, I in all events am willing but perhaps also able to be of some use and service to you, but that this will be impossible in the event that my own craft fills with water (which I’m trying to prevent, though) before the moment in question. I’m trying to prevent that myself, though, but still I wouldn’t cry out to you without necessity. I’m not afraid in the face of danger either, but nonetheless I try to be prepared in case disaster strikes. If it seems to you unfounded that I urge that we should gradually let my, but I would rather say our2 little painting business become the heart of a business that we could go on to undertake together, for my part I insist that it can and will become something if we can remain sufficiently united.
   If I don’t have the same ideas as you, don’t suspect me of bad faith or base intentions anyway, either towards you or towards those at home. I do nothing to those at home that I have no right to do, since I absolutely and always keep out of their affairs. Don’t ask for or urge advice, keep entirely to my own territory — and even keep my feelings about their affairs to myself too, since we don’t understand one another’s interests anyway. And to you I speak now, and will go on speaking, as someone whose business is in paintings to someone else whose business is in paintings, and I will not intrude on the other territory. And the question that I started to discuss with you is this: even if the slump is severe, and even if we both have to take great trouble, we must see to it that we keep an energetic hand on the little painting business that belongs to you as well as to me. I say, it might be a boat that could possibly be of service to you in the storm, although I wish for the storm as little as you can wish for it. Regards, Yours truly, Vincent  My dear Theo, I’ve heard from that colourman — who tells me I can send the paintings. But that he wants me to send them as soon as possible because there are many strangers in The Hague at present. He’s quite right there. What I want to ask you is that you try to send me enough for me to get the crate made and pay the carriage. Deduct it next month, if you like — but I have nothing, and it’s important to me to get my consignment off immediately. Your visit really left me with a less than favourable impression — I believe more than ever that more difficulties await you in the next few years than you imagine. I continue to insist that it’s somewhat fatal that your energy has evidently taken a different direction, rather than working on our getting our heads above water with the painting. And yet it’s such a short while ago that you wrote that you now had more confidence that my work was good. 
   You take it as though I was doing you wrong or was hostile to you, now I most decidedly have rather a lot of remarks to make. And considerable concerns for the future. I can’t speak other than I did, can I? To my mind you don’t in the least belong among the rising men now. Take this amiss of me — if you will — and treat me as you will accordingly.  I’m willing to take back my remarks should I see very different things in you, but that I made them during your visit — Yes. But even though you say today, ‘I’m selling 500, francs’ worth a year’ — this doesn’t make any impression on me at all, since I’m only too convinced of the precariousness of it all — you keeping up even a half or a fifth of that and delivering in the years ahead. 
   It’s too up in the air for me, too little at ground level. And art itself is solid enough, that’s not the trouble. But, ‘to be a counting-house will pass’ was said, not by me, but by someone whose words came dreadfully true. And I wish you were, or would become, a painter. I put it bluntly, more strongly than before, because I believe so firmly that the large-scale art trade is, in many respects, too much like tulip mania. And the positions in it dependent on chance and whim. Make a miscalculation — make what may be an insignificant mistake — and — what’s left of that huge figure you’re turning over now? That figure depends on G&Cie’s whim. And KNOWLEDGE of art, stripped bare, is related, more closely than you think, to the practice of art. TRADE in paintings is something very different when one is on one’s own from when one works for large distributors. And it’s the same with other things, too. 
   Anyway — work hard — but — try to work sensibly too. The trouble you’ve taken together with me — for providing money is also taking trouble and there’s absolutely no getting away from it — this trouble has at least been an act of personal initiative, and of personal will and energy — but what am I to think or say of it if, little by little, with the decided weakening of the financial aid, something else weren’t to be put in its place? And now, above all, to my mind at any rate, it’s the time to try to push ahead with my work. I’ve also been looking for addresses in Antwerp, and will hear more precisely about them before long. Then I can probably send things there, too. But if you want these things, help me to bring them about. You said to me yourself, Where there is a will there is a way;a well then, I’ll take you at your word a little as to whether you’re really seeking for us to make progress. If I were to ask for extravagant things and you refused, then so be it — but where they’re the most essential, the very simplest necessities, and the lack just becomes more and more, and worse and worse, then I think you’re taking economy too far, and in this respect it’s very far from being useful. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Just a word about Serret and about Portier. Tell them as it is, that is that I did have studies ready, but that I had to pay a colourman who was making it difficult for me just now. That in order to put a stop to it, I wrote to tell him that I put his paint in my studies, and that I asked him to take the trouble to sell something for me instead of nagging. That I’ll go through with it, and have to send him things. That as to the drawings which I said I’d show Serret, since I’m in a hurry to do things, I need them myself. But I do still think it’s of some importance that at any rate he knows that I really did have them when you came, and that you tell him that you saw them at my place, and then also tell him exactly what you think. I won’t influence your own opinion. 
   That I’m sad about your thinking that this is all right, though, yes — that is so. But I don’t refuse to take such measures — and even if one of these colourmen wanted to sell off my bits and pieces, he would be welcome to go to those lengths. It’s certain that the paint-dealing gentlemen wouldn’t blush to do it. However, I’m fed up with talking about it; I’ve said what I had to say — and you — you can deal with my suggestion as you see fit.  And if these fellows want to attack me and sell me up, since they expressly threatened me with collection, and that over matters of less than 30 guilders, then I won’t be able to resist them and will let them do as they please, but it will be as if it happens before your very eyes, since you’ve just been here. That I can’t stop the work at the level I now am, that’s true. I need paint &c. every day. I must make progress, and if I want to pay for what I need today, then an outstanding bill from yesterday will have to wait. 
   For your information, this is how it is with me for the rest of the year, precisely and in detail — I have to pay: three suppliers who are all pestering me, one 45 guilders, the other 25 guilders, the other 30 guilders. These are the exact sums outstanding on accounts which have of course been much higher over the course of the year, but which I pay off in cash, as much as I possibly can with the utmost effort. 

deficit therefore
 
100
 guilders



Add to this rent in November

 
25
    ,,


__________________  


 
 
125
    250
 guilders
     francs



 Suppose I get 4 x 150 francs from you for Sept. Oct.  Nov. Dec.= 600 francs. That then leaves 350 francs to last from now  until New Year. And then bear in mind that I have 
 literally nothing left this month, and that I also have to live
 this month.
 So that from Aug. – 1 January, in other words almost 5 months, I have to live and paint on 350 francs. Which I can do on 150 francs a month, but not easily, but anyway it’s possible as a minimum. However, if in the course of 4 months 250 francs has to be deducted to pay for paint and rent, well then, the work is 
   hampered and obstructed so much that one doesn’t know what to do, and would rather say to the fellows sell my things then! But let me work! Without hesitation I’ve just thrown this month in to calm the fellows down. But the hardship that’s caused is bad enough. And my last word on the subject is that if my work were weak and awful, I would agree with you if you said — ‘I can’t do anything about it’. Well — since larger and smaller painted studies as well as new drawings were able to make you understand that we’re making progress with it, I’m not so sure whether ‘I can’t do anything about it’ should be your final word. Talk to Serret, talk to Portier about it — and say how much I want to keep working and how little opportunity I have myself to find art lovers, since painting the peasants means that once and for all the countryside, not the city is my place of work. Vincent  My dear Theo, I wanted to add to my letter of the day before yesterday1 that I had a letter from Rappard yesterday, and our quarrel is wholly made up, that he sent me a croquis of a large painting of a brickworks that he’s working on. This looks very original — if one wanted to find other paintings in the same spirit, it would be Meunier, say, whose mine-workers you saw in Antwerp. He’s rented a small house outside Utrecht, just as a studio (and arranged for light from above) near the brickworks, and since he’s also going back to Terschelling he’s deep in nature again, and to my mind that’s better than working in town. I wanted to tell you, though, that I hope that the quarrel that we have will end like this, too, and that it will be settled. 
   No more than I can5 accept his criticism, can I fully resign myself to the present situation in which my work is held up so badly by my financial difficulties. I don’t ask you to put this right alone, but I simply want us to do our best together (and not just I alone either) to make headway. It’s an effort for you, too, and not easy; I know that, and as such I appreciate it very much, but making an effort for a goal is no misfortune, and having to fight is the precondition for every honest victory. The expenses of painting can’t always be avoided, and not incurring them is sometimes not the best policy, because nothing decent could come of it if one hesitated to pay for models or essential painting materials. And since it’s getting harder for me rather than better, it has eventually got to such a pitch that I definitely have to complain.
   And I say once more, let’s keep my little painting business in order, because sooner or later we might be in sore need of it. When there’s a storm in the air, one has to keep the boats in good shape. The man I now have in The Hague is Leurs, who doesn’t live in Praktizijnshoek any more but in Molenstraat. He’s asking me to send him more than one painting in order to have more than one chance, and is offering me his two windows. And since he’s very hard pressed for money himself, he won’t shrink from making an effort. I’m sending him a couple of cottages, the old tower9 and smaller ones of figures. And while he shows those, I’ll make a few new ones to keep him going. I’ve also got a chance of persuading a second in The Hague. But for me it comes down to being able to go on working. I’ve made another small painting of the wheat harvest since you left, the same size as the women pulling turnips in the snow:12
   a reaper, a woman binding sheaves, sheaves, and the windmill, like the drawings you saw. An effect in the evening after sunset. Also more studies of interiors. Once again I suggest that you just talk it over with Portier and Serret, say that I’m in quite a fix, encourage them to do what they can, that for my part I’ll see about sending them new things. And let’s see about getting that crate off. I’ve also painted 3 more studies of the women among the potatoes, the first of which you’ve already seen. Rappard had spoken to Wenckebach, and in his letter there was no longer any trace of the tone he’d started to take. And although he’s going to Terschelling first, he writes that he wants to come and make more studies here. Regards, and wishing you good fortune. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter and 20 francs enclosed in good order, and thank you for them. Now I can inform you that I’ve sent my crate to Leurs with 7 different things and, to make it more complete, another 12 smaller painted studies. I’ve also written to tell Wisselingh that I’ve sent this batch and asked him to go and see them. I’m still sorry that this batch didn’t go to you instead, though. If we’d paid off Leurs and you’d taken this batch and then, if you were getting too many of the same kind, we had picked out this and that from the different batches to try in Holland, then the ones that still remained with you would, to my mind, have been the best and a nucleus to gradually expand as we progressed. As you say, though, it’s no use crying over spilt milk. Now as a provisional answer to what you write about drawings of figures in their surroundings, I sent a few off today. I doubt whether they’re suitable for framing purposes — and if I have a bit of luck in finding something better in the fields, I’ll see about adding a few new ones very soon.
   As to what you write about being convinced that the economizing hasn’t gone far enough yet, you may be seeing this in your ledger, if the outgoings are greater than the income. Possibly so. But the reason??? Well yes — the people at home — old chap, you can’t carry on as you’re doing now. I’m suffering because of it — I can assure you of that — but if need be I’m prepared to accept that I’m even poorer than in other years because of it. But are they any happier for it at home, and is it making them any better off — — — the consequences later on, for them and for you, will you be happy about them? Truly — when I think back to my own experience, when I consider that several years at G&Cie ended by my feeling very strongly drawn towards home, when I think how a crisis ensued for me, bewildering, and in which I so very soon stood entirely alone, and everything and everyone I had previously thought would endure, changed, and none of it stood fast. 
   When I think back to those sad times, I’m so very much afraid that the present situation won’t prove to be firm ground under your feet. And so I feel compelled — not in reproach, not to frighten you, not to dishearten you, but as a piece of harsh truth — to tell you that my view is that the sun can set for you — indeed — is setting. That what I add — renew yourself, but seek this renewal in the heart of the profession: painting, and dealing too, but in our own things — is proof enough that I don’t mean it reproachfully or insultingly. I speak as having known strife myself and as being in the middle of my battle. Anyway. With every year that one gets on in life, the time seems to go faster, more happens  things pick up speed. The fact that I say it straight out is so that you know that, should something change for you, I’d find it a natural, 
   very understandable matter and, far from reproaching you for it, would simply suggest doing more together and not allowing either one of us to be overwhelmed. Both, on the contrary, to show that we have vigour and energy — and a love of art of a sound, serious standard. In my case I always have to contend with quite serious obstacles, far from being prosperous. Very well — but the more unfavourable the outward becomes, the more the inward, that is the passion for the work, increases. And — even if they aren’t new resources, new — renewed — opportunities — do still open up. Anyway. As I said, I added a couple of new ones to this small batch of drawings, but this month I’ll try to make several the size of that woman shelling peas, which was the last one I made. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent 
   Don’t take it amiss of me that I’m sticking primarily with the figures, even though it’s the most expensive. The more difficult times were to get, the more I’d seek to master precisely that. For one can foresee that if the enthusiasm to buy doesn’t pick up, the people who do still buy will set higher standards, and then the peasant figure is something that still has a real chance of lasting. And as regards The Hague — I consider it possible that some people whom I know and who are now against me, could be persuaded. And although it may have to take a long time, I shan’t give up easily as yet, that I can assure you. The Ingres is very good to draw on — and I’m pleased with these sketchbooks. I’ve held on to the book by Bracquemond because at the first reading I didn’t understand what he’s saying about warm and cool, but 
   I think he’s saying something important about light. This is what I must get to the bottom of and should re-read. The other chapters are also important, and his definitions well thought out. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and 150 francs enclosed. I also received the two new Lhermittes today. He’s a master of the figure. He’s able to do what he likes with it — conceiving the whole neither from the colour nor from the local tone, but rather proceeding from the light — as Rembrandt did — there’s something astonishingly masterly in everything he does — in modelling, above all things, he utterly satisfies the demands of honesty. A great deal is said about — Poussin. Bracquemond talks about him, too. The French call Poussin their greatest ever painter among the old masters. Well it’s certain that what’s said about Poussin, whom I know so very little about, I find in Lhermitte and in Millet. But with this distinction, that it seems to me Poussin is the original grain, the others are the full ear. For my part, then, I rate today’s superior.
   This last fortnight I’ve had a great deal of trouble with the reverend gentlemen of the priesthood, who gave me to understand — of course with the best of intentions and, no less than others, believing that it was their duty to interfere — who gave me to understand that I shouldn’t be too familiar with people beneath my station — who, having spoken to me in those terms, spoke in a very different tone to the ‘people of lower station’, that’s to say with threats that they mustn’t allow themselves to be painted. This time I simply went straight to the burgomaster4 and told him exactly what had happened, and pointed out that this was none of the priests’ business and that they should stick to their own province of more abstract things. In any event, I’m not encountering any more opposition for the time being, and I think it quite possible that that’s how it will remain. A girl I’d often painted was having a child and they thought it was mine, although it wasn’t me. However, knowing the facts of the matter from the girl herself and it being a case in which a member of the priest’s congregation in Nuenen 
   had behaved extremely badly, they can’t get their teeth into me, at least not this time. But you see that it isn’t easy to paint people at home and draw them as they go about their business. Anyway — they won’t easily win in this case, and this winter I do hope to keep the very same models, who are of the old Brabant stock through and through. Even so, I have a few more new drawings. But now, in the last few days, I could6 not get anyone in the fields. Fortunately for me, the priest isn’t yet, but is nonetheless beginning to become, quite unpopular. It’s a bad business, though, and if it were to continue I’d probably move. You’ll ask what’s the point of being a disagreeable person — sometimes you have to be. If I’d discussed it meekly they’d have ground me down without mercy. And when they hinder me in my work, sometimes the only way I know is an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. The priest went so far as to promise the people money if they didn’t allow themselves to be painted — however, the people replied very pertly that they’d rather earn it from me than go cap in hand to him. But you see, they only do it for the sake of earning money and I don’t get anything done for nothing around here. 
   You ask me whether Rappard has ever sold anything. I know he’s flusher at present than before, that for a long time, for instance, he had a nude model day after day, that for the purposes of a painting of a brickworks he’s now rented a small house actually on the spot and altered it so that he had light from above7 — I know that he’s been on another trip through Drenthe8 and that he’s also going to Terschelling. That all of this is pretty expensive, and the money for it has to come from somewhere. That although he may have money of his own, he must be earning as well, because otherwise he couldn’t do what he’s doing. It may be that his family is buying or friends, that’s possible, but at any rate somebody must be. But this evening I’m much too occupied with Lhermitte’s drawings to go on writing any more about other things. When I think about Millet or about Lhermitte — then — I find modern art as great — as Michelangelo and Rembrandt — the old infinite, the new infinite too — the old genius, the new genius. Perhaps someone like Chenavard doesn’t see it like this9 — but for my part I’m convinced — that in this regard one can believe in the present. The fact that I have a definite belief as regards art also means that I know what I want to get in my own work, and that I’ll try to get it even if I go under in the attempt. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I wanted to drop you a line to tell you that I have a few things ready that I wanted to send you. I’ve read Bracquemond’s book more than once, and have thought about it a lot. Although what he says about the colours isn’t new — although it comes down to the same thing — at bottom — as the theories that Delacroix discovered2 — although what he says about drawing — modelling is drawing, drawing is modelling3 — isn’t new either — all the same, I’ve seldom read more powerful words for these and other truths. In short — I think the book very good — and have thought about it a lot. What I have for you are some still lifes — of a basket of potatoes — fruit — a copper kettle &c., but which I made specifically in connection with modelling with different colours, and I would like Portier to see them.
   I’ll send them to you as soon as I have the money because am at the end of the month. Am also curious about the Lhermitte, whether there’s been one this month. I sent for paint from Schoenfeld in Düsseldorf, a few colours that I can’t easily get here. The fact that the colour isn’t right in the painting of the potato eaters7 is at least in part the fault of the paint. I was reminded of it because I was painting a large still life in which I was looking for similar tones and, not satisfied with it because I was getting the same things as then in it again — redid it. And going by that experience, I would have got it much better with mineral blue, which I have now, than with what I had until now. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I had wanted to inform you earlier of the safe receipt of your letter and the 150 francs enclosed. I’ve also received the September Lhermitte — it’s splendid. You write about the Poussins in the Louvre2 — I like Poussin very much. But what a long time ago it is — too long — since I saw those paintings. As to that — I need to see paintings, and I must do something about it. Precisely because I very much hope to go finding people for my own work, I think it will be good for me to go on a trip every now and then. Longing most of all for Rembrandt and Frans Hals, one day this week I’m going to the museum in Amsterdam4 with a friend of mine in Eindhoven5 whose studies I once showed you. If I can acquire connections for my own work, I won’t fail to do so — and I firmly believe that with perseverance I’ll win.
   As for the work, I’ve been painting a lot of still lifes lately, as I already wrote, and I like it enormously. I’ll send you some. I know that they’re difficult to sell — but it’s devilish useful and I’ll go on doing a lot to them in the winter. You’ll get a large still life of potatoes — where I’ve tried to get body into it — I mean express the material. Such that they become lumps that have weight and are solid, which you’d feel if they were thrown at you, for instance. Anyway, you’ll just have to see. That dispute I had with the priest — I haven’t had much more bother with it. There’ll always be God-fearing natives in the village who’ll still believe me capable of it, though, because it’s certain that the priest would love to pin the blame for that business on me. Since I’m not to blame, though, the rumours from that quarter leave me 
   completely cold. As long as they don’t get in the way of my painting I don’t take any notice of them whatsoever. I’ve remained on good terms with the peasants to whom it happened and where I went to paint a lot, and am just as welcome in their home as before. I’m now working on still lifes of my birds’ nests, and I’ve finished 4 of them. I think that some people who know nature well might like them because of the colours of the moss, dry leaves and grasses, clay &c. I’ll write to you again at the end of this week, when I’m back from the little trip to Amsterdam. Since I have to pay my rent again next month, I can hardly afford the expense. But it’s essential. So more soon. Yours truly, Vincent I’m sure my work will benefit in the long run if I see more paintings — because when I see a painting I can work out what it’s done with.
   As for Poussin — he’s a painter who thinks and makes one think about everything — in whose paintings all reality is at the same time symbolic. In the work of Millet, of Lhermitte, all reality is also symbolic at the same time. They’re something other than what people call realists.
    In the winter, when I have more time for it, I’ll make several drawings of this sort of thing. I feel for the brood and the nests — particularly those human nests, those cottages on the heath and their inhabitants. My dear Theo, I’ve been to Amsterdam this week — I hardly had time to see anything but the museum. I was there 3 days; went Tuesday, back Thursday. Result is that I’m very glad I went, whatever the cost, and that I don’t propose going for so long again without seeing paintings. I’d already put it off and put it off, that and so much else, because of the cost. But it’s much better that I can no longer imagine that this is the thing to do. I get too much out of it — for my work, and when I look at the old paintings, which I can decipher as regards technique very differently from before — then perhaps I have precious little need for conversation anyway. I don’t know whether you remember that to the left of the Night watch, in other words as a pendant to the Syndics, there’s a painting — it was unknown to me until now — by Frans Hals and P. Codde, 20 or so officers full length. Have you noticed it??? In itself, that painting alone makes the trip to Amsterdam well worth while, especially for a colourist. There’s a figure in it, the figure of the standard-bearer in the extreme left corner, right up against the frame. 
   That figure is in grey from top to toe, let’s call it pearl grey, — of a singular neutral tone — probably obtained with orange and blue mixed so that they neutralize each other — by varying this basic colour in itself — by making it a little lighter here, a little darker there, the whole figure is as it were painted with one and the same grey. But the leather shoes are a different material from the leggings, which are different from the folds of the breeches, which are different from the doublet — expressing different materials, very different in colour one from another, still all one family of grey — but wait! Into that grey he now introduces blue and orange — and some white. The doublet has satin ribbons of a divine soft blue. Sash and flag orange — a white collar. Orange, white, blue, as the national colours were then. Orange and blue next to each other, that most glorious spectrum — on a ground of grey judiciously mixed, 
   precisely by uniting just those two, let me call them poles of electricity (in terms of colour, though) so that they obliterate each other, a white against that grey. Further carried through in that painting — other orange spectrums against a different blue, further the most glorious blacks against the most glorious whites — the heads — some twenty — sparkling with spirit and life, and how they’re done! and what colour! the superb appearance of all those fellows, full length. But that orange, white, blue chap in the left corner — — …… I’ve seldom seen a more divinely beautiful figure — — it’s something marvellous.  Delacroix would have adored it — just adored it to the utmost. I stood there literally rooted to the spot. Now you know the singer, that laughing chap — bust in a greenish black with carmine. Carmine in the flesh colour, too. You know the bust of the man in yellow — dull lemon — whose face, because of the opposition of tones, is a daring and masterly bronze, like wine-red (violet?).
   Bürger wrote about Rembrandt’s Jewish bride9 just as he wrote about Vermeer of Delft, just as he wrote about Millet’s sower,just as he wrote about Frans Hals12 — dedicating himself and surpassing himself. The Syndics is perfect — the finest Rembrandt — but that Jewish bride — not reckoned so much — what an intimate, what an infinitely sympathetic painting, painted — with a glowing hand. You see, in The syndics Rembrandt is true to life, although even there he still goes into the higher — into the very highest — infinite. But yet — Rembrandt could do something else — when he didn’t have to be true in the literal sense, as he did in a portrait — when he could — make poetry — be a poet, that’s to say Creator. That’s what he is in the Jewish bride. Oh how Delacroix would have understood that very painting! What a noble sentiment, fathomlessly deep. One must have died many times to paint like this14 — is certainly applicable here. Still — one can speak about the paintings by Frans Hals, he always remains — on earth. Rembrandt goes so deep into the mysterious that he says things for which there are no words in any language. It is with justice that they call Rembrandt — magician16— that’s no easy occupation. 
   I’ve packed up various still lifes which you’ll receive next week, with two souvenirs of Amsterdam that I snatched in haste and also a couple of drawings. Will also send you before long a book by De Goncourt — Chérie. De Goncourt is always good, and the way he works so conscientious, and so much toil goes into it. I saw two paintings by Israëls in Amsterdam, that is the Zandvoort fisherman and — one of his very latest, an old woman, hunched up like a bundle of rags, by a bedstead in which her husband’s corpse is lying. I thought them both masterly. Let people prattle on about technique as they will, with hollow, hypocritical, Pharisee words — the true painters — allow themselves to be guided by that conscience that’s called sentiment; their soul, their brains aren’t led by the brush, but the brush is led by their brains. Moreover it’s the canvas that’s afraid of a true painter, and not the painter who’s afraid of the canvas. 
   In Amsterdam I saw other present-day paintings, Witkamp20 and others. Witkamp’s certainly the best, reminds me of Jules Breton; others I have in mind but won’t name, who — fence — with what they call technique, for my part I found WEAK precisely in the technical sense. You know — all those cold, grey tones that they think are distinguished and that are flat and bloody boringly, childishly mixed. Nowadays, for the convenience of painters who work in what they think is a distinguished, light spectrum, they deliberately manufacture colours consisting of — the ordinary ones mixed with pure white. Bah! Listen — the technique, the mixing of colour, the modelling of the Zandvoort fisherman, for instance, is to my mind Delacroix-like and superb, and the present-day cold, flat greys — don’t mean much in terms of technique, become paint, and Israëls is beyond the paint. To be sure — I’m not talking about Jaap Maris, Willem Maris, Mauve, Neuhuys, who each worked in his singular spectrum in the right manner — Blommers &c. 
   But the school of the masters, their followers, Theo — I think they’re getting threadbare. Went to the Fodor too. Decamps’s shepherd really is a masterpiece23 — do you remember the Meissonier — a sketch — of a deathbed? The Diaz? Well, I always like to see Bosboom, Waldorp, Nuijen, Rochussen, the original fellows of that period 40 years back. Rochussen has a vitality like Gavarni’s. The still lifes I’m sending you are studies for colour. I’m going to do some more — don’t think this is pointless. They’ll sink in after a while, but in a year, say, they’ll be better than now once they’re dry right through and are given a thorough varnishing. If you use drawing pins to hang a large number of my studies on a wall in your room, both the earlier ones and these — just jumbled together — you’ll see, I believe, that there’s a link between these studies, that the colours work well alongside one another. 
   Speaking — of — too black — I’m very glad, all the more so as I see more of the paintings in cold, childish spectrums — that they think my studies are too black. Look at the Zandvoort fisherman, and what is it painted with? Is it painted with red, with blue, with yellow, with black and some off-white, with brown (all well mixed and broken) or not? When Israëls says that one mustn’t be black, he certainly never means what they’re making of it now; he means that one gives colour to the shadows, but of course that really doesn’t rule out a single spectrum, however low, not that of the blacks and browns and deep blues. But what’s the point of thinking about it — it’s better to think about Rembrandt, about Frans Hals, about Israëls, than about that respectable impotence. 
   I’m writing at some length — even if you perhaps don’t believe what I say about the colours, and even if you think me pessimistic when I say that much of what they call subtle grey is very ugly grey, even if you think me pessimistic or worse still when I also condemn the smooth finishing of faces, hands, eyes, since all the great masters worked differently — perhaps, little by little, your own study of art, which you have happily begun again properly, will change you too. Now I have a favour to ask you. That friend of mine in Eindhoven, who went with me to Amsterdam, bought Bürger, Musées de la Hollande, Van der Hoop et Rotterdam at C.M.’s, but C.M. didn’t have the first volume, Musées de la Haye et d’Amsterdam. We must have that one though. It’s out of print, but you’ll be able to dig one up somewhere, and he’s even prepared to give 10 francs for it if need be, although preferably cheaper, of course. I’ll send you what it costs you straightaway, since it’s for him, and he charged me with this on that condition. So will you do your best to get it? If you do find it, read it through again yourself first — because it’s so good. I didn’t go into C.M.’s with him. 
 0  The two little panels I painted in Amsterdam were done in a tearing hurry, one of them, mark you, in the station waiting room when I was a bit early for the train, the other one in the morning, before I went to the museum at about 10 o’clock. Even so, I’m sending them to you, in the manner of tiles on which one has dashed something off with a few strokes. As regards the end of this month — old chap, I’m literally cleaned out — what’s to be done? Couldn’t you send an extra twenty francs or something? I have to pay for paint again next month, 1 Nov. 25 guilders rent. As regards connections for my work — I did speak to someone, and if I ever go again I’ll take work with me. There’s a general laxness that MAKES it EASY ENOUGH as regards finding a chance to exhibit. LET´S PAINT A VERY GREAT DEAL. That’s the message if we want to succeed, work a lot precisely because it’s slack — then one day, rather than finding all ports closed to us — we may be able to lash a broom to the mast. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Today I sent — carriage paid — crate V4 with the still lifes. To my regret, the two little sketches of Amsterdam are quite badly damaged. They got wet on the journey; then the little panels warped when they dried, and dust &c. got into them. I’m sending them all the same to show you that if, in the space of an hour, I want to dash off an impression somewhere, I’m beginning to be able to do this in the same sentiment as others who — analyze — their impressions. And give themselves a reason for what they see. This is something other than feeling, that’s to say undergoing impressions — there may perhaps be a great deal between experiencing impressions and — analyzing them, that’s to say taking them apart and putting them together again. But it’s enjoyable to put something down in a rush. What particularly struck me when I saw the old Dutch paintings again is that they were usually painted quickly. That these great masters like Hals, Rembrandt, Ruisdael — so many others — as far as possible just put it straight down — and didn’t come back to it so very much.
   And — this, too, please — that if it worked, they left it alone. Above all I admired hands by Rembrandt and Hals — hands that lived, but were not finished in the sense that people want to enforce nowadays. Particular hands in the Syndics even, in the Jewish bride, in Frans Hals. And heads, too — eyes, nose, mouth done with the first brushstrokes, without any sort of retouching. Unger, Bracquemond etched it well — as it was done, and one can see the manner of painting in their etchings. Theo, how necessary it is at this time to look at old Dutch paintings now and again! And at the French paintings, Corot, Millet &c. The rest, one can if necessary do without them very well — and upset some people more than they think.
   Paint in one go, as far as possible in one go. What a joy it is to see a Frans Hals like that — how very different it is from the paintings — there are so many of them — where everything has been carefully smoothed out in the same way. I happened to see a Meissonier (the one at the Fodor)7 on the same day that I saw old Dutch masters, Brouwer, Ostade, Ter Borch in particular. Well then — Meissonier does it like them — a very considered, very calculated touch — but — on in one go and, if possible, right in one go. I think it’s better to take off a part that goes wrong with a palette knife and start again from the beginning than to keep coming back to it. Now — I saw a sketch by Rubens and a sketch by Diaz, too, as it were at the same time. They were by no means the same, but the belief that the colour expresses the form when it’s in its place and in its context — that they do have in common. At any rate Diaz is a painter to the core — and he was conscientious to the tips of his fingers. 
   The Diaz in the Fodor is only sketchy, but perhaps precisely because of this it was a real joy for me, who hadn’t seen one in years, to see one again, and it stood up very well, even when one had just seen the way the old masters went about it. I must just come back to certain present-day paintings that are becoming more and more numerous. Some 10, 15 years ago people started to talk about ‘clarity of light’. It’s true that originally this was a good thing; it’s a fact that masterly things came about as a result of that system. But where it increasingly degenerates into an overproduction of paintings where all through the painting — in all 4 corners the same light, the same what I think they call day tone and local colour dominates, is this a good thing??? I think not. Is the Ruisdael in the Van der Hoop, the one with the mill, not outdoors? Is there no sky in it and vast space? And yet — the whole painting is very much darker than the fellows would do, sky and earth moreover form a single whole, belong together. Van Goyen — that Corot among the Dutchmen — I stood for a long time in front of that masterly piece in the Dupper Collection, two oaks on a dune in the autumn, in a storm.
   A sentiment indeed, let me say, like Jules Dupré or like The bush. But there’s ordinary yellow ochre rather than — white — carried through in the painting. Now the Cuyp — the view of Dordrecht in the Van der Hoop14 — entirely reddish gold — there again — the ochres. Frans Hals’s yellow — call it what you will, dull lemon or fawn yellow — what’s it done with? It seems very light in the painting — but just try holding white against it. A great lesson that the old Dutch masters teach, it seems to me, is this: to regard drawing and colour as one — which Bracquemond says too. That now — many do not do it, they draw with everything except with sound colour. Oh Theo, it’s so awful to listen to, it’s so horribly boring when a chap like Haverman, say, talks about ‘technique’. I don’t say Rappard, because he talks like that too but, fortunately for him, paints better than he talks.
   I have absolutely no desire to make a lot of acquaintances among the painting gang. But again — speaking of technique — there’s a great deal sounder and more solid technique in Israëls — for instance in that very old work, the Zandvoort fisherman, with superb chiaroscuro18 — than the technique of those who are equally smooth and flat all over, and distinguished by their cold, tinny colour. The Zandvoort fisherman, well, just go ahead and hang it next to an old Delacroix, The barque of Dante, and it’s the same family. I believe in that, but every day I dislike the paintings that are equally light all over more and more. It’s an unpleasant thing for me when they say that I have ‘no technique’ — it’s possible that this will blow over because I don’t make the acquaintance of any of the painters. It’s true, on the contrary, that it’s precisely in terms of technique that I find many of the people who prattle on about it the most are weak. I wrote to you about that before. But if I show any of my work in Holland, I know in advance what I have to deal with and with what sort of 
   calibre of technicians. Meanwhile, I’d rather go very calmly to the old Dutchmen and rather to the paintings by Israëls and those who have a direct affinity with Israëls, which the newer ones do not. They are, rather, diametrically opposed to Israëls. And I think I’ve observed that Israëls himself, Maris, Mauve, Neuhuys himself, view a certain direction we’re now discussing with nothing but displeasure. A Mesdag, for instance, who was once a terrible realist, as you’ll remember — is becoming more tonal in his later paintings and drawings, and often more mysterious. Anyway. Witkamp has a devilish lot that’s good — resembles Jules Breton or Bastien-Lepage — but — Jules Breton is warm, and he’s much too cold. And that’s not a fault that’s easy to put right — to get a thing warm, it has to be put on warm, and otherwise one won’t easily get the cold out of it. In many cases, what they call brightness is an ugly studio tone in a cheerless city studio. It seems people don’t look at the half-light in the early morning or in the evening, it seems nothing exists other than midday from 11-3 — truly a very respectable hour! — but — often as characterless as Jan Salie.
   But for all that, Theo — I’m devilish poor at present. Painting a lot is expensive — I feel really hard up, and as for the end of the month, it’s miserable. The fact that ‘money is the sinews of war’24 sadly can’t be ignored in painting either. Nothing but sorrow comes out of war, though, there is only destruction, and in painting it’s sometimes — sowing — even if the painter doesn’t reap the harvest himself. How are you and how’s business? I don’t know whether my intuition is right — but judging from the shop windows &c. &c., the Art trade in Amsterdam certainly did not appear to be flourishing — but oh so quiet and respectable. Truly, overconfidence and enthusiasm aren’t the faults(?) of the present day. I hardly spoke to anyone — but indirectly sounded things out because I’m curious as to what the results will be, what it will come to in the art trade. I don’t think you’re exactly overwhelmed with paintings, are you? In the winter I’m going to explore various things regarding manner that I noticed in the old paintings. I saw a great deal that I needed. But this above all things — what they call — dashing off — you see that’s what the old Dutch painters did famously. 
   That — dashing off — with a few brushstrokes, they won’t hear of it now — but how true the results are. And how masterfully well many French painters, how an Israëls understood precisely that. At the museum — I thought a lot about Delacroix. Why? Because in front of Hals, in front of Rembrandt, in front of Ruisdael and others, I thought constantly of that saying, When Delacroix paints – it’s like the lion devouring his piece of flesh. How true that is — and oh, Theo — when I think about what I’ll call the self-styled technical gang, how deathly it is. Rest assured that if I ever have to do with those gentlemen or come across one of them, I’ll play the innocent — but — à la Vireloque — followed by a cutting remark. I hate it when things hang fire and go wrong. And isn’t it something fatal, that forced finishing the same everywhere (what they call finishing!), everywhere that same boring grey light instead of light and shade — local colour, colour instead of tone? Aren’t those deplorable things — and isn’t it so? 
 0  Anyway — I think these things are wrong because I think Israëls, for instance, so good, because there are so many new and old painters alike whom one can adore. I should have realized earlier that I’m most probably boring you with this letter. But I simply didn’t think about it; for my part I can say that I wish you’d write to me about your impressions of things in the Louvre or Luxembourg or of anywhere else. Write soon, if you will — and be aware that it’s awfully tough for me at the end of the month. All the same, I’m glad I went there, even if it’s at a moment when I can afford the expenditure less than ever. As to that — things will be very hard around New Year, say, but anyway — nothing ventured, nothing gained, and for my part I’ll always resign myself to being in difficulties if it’s for the sake of painting. Regards, hope you’ll get my consignment in good order. There’s a book by De Goncourt about Chardin, Boucher, Watteau and Fragonard — I must read it; do you or any of your acquaintances have it? I don’t suppose you do, but do you perhaps know whether or not it’s particularly important? Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I received your letter with the enclosed today. Your letter gave me a great deal of pleasure because I think I discern in it a few things that I’d like to go into in more detail. Coming straight to the point: what you write about a certain study of a basket of apples1 — is well observed — but — did you come up with that on your own??? Because I fancy, indeed I’d say know for sure, that you used not to see that sort of thing. Be this as it may — here we are on the way to agreeing more about colours. Now pursue those questions — because that will get you further, and Bürger and Mantz and Silvestre knew that. Just to say how that study was painted — quite simply this. Green and red are complementary. Well there’s a particular — red in the apples, very coarse in itself — and greenish things as well. Now there are one or two apples in a different colour too — which make the whole thing right — in a particular pink. That pink — is the broken colour, created by mixing the aforementioned red and the aforementioned greenish. There you have the reason why there’s an association between the colours. Added to this is a second contrast — the background forms a contrast to the foreground. 
   The one is a neutral colour, obtained by breaking blue with orange, the other the same neutral colour, only altered by the addition of some yellow. But — this gives me immense pleasure, that either by direct or by indirect personal feeling you notice a colour combination. Further — that one of the studies appeared to you to be a variation on the brown-grey theme — that’s very definitely the case — only — all 3 of them are, the ones of the potatoes, with the difference that one is a study in sienna, the other in burnt sienna, the other in — yellow ochre and red ochre. The latter — that’s the large one — to my mind — is the best — despite the matt black background, which I left matt on purpose because the ochres are also naturally non-transparent colours. As regards this study — the largest one of the potatoes — it was made by altering those non-transparent ochres, by breaking them with a transparent blue.
   Red ochre and yellow ochre forming an orange, their combination with blue is more neutral, and they become either redder or yellower against that neutralized colour. The highest light on that whole canvas is quite simply some pure yellow ochre. And the fact that this matt yellow still stands out is because it’s in a wide field of a sort, albeit neutral, of violet; after all — red ochre with a blue gives violet tones. Well — the nests were also painted on a black background on purpose5 — for the reason that I simply want it to be obvious in these studies that the objects appear against a conventional background, and are not in their natural setting. A — living nest in nature is — something very different; one hardly sees the nest itself, one sees the birds. Given that one wants to paint nests from one’s collection of nests, one can’t say emphatically enough that the background and setting in nature are very different — so I made the background — simply black. 
   That, though, a coloured background is attractive in a still life is — certain. In Amsterdam I saw still lifes by Miss Vos that I thought outstanding — a good deal better than Blaise Desgoffe — really Van Beijerenesque. It also occurred to me that those simple still lifes of hers had a good deal more artistic value than many a pretentious canvas by other Amsterdam artists. They struck me as very good. Particularly one with a gold vase, a few empty oyster shells, a broken coconut shell and a crust of bread. I’ll send you the book by Blanc7 — want to read L’art du XVIIIme siècle as soon as possible — I particularly want to hear something about Chardin by De Goncourt. La Caze’s Rembrandt is really also in that sentiment of Rembrandt’s late years. It must be 12 years ago that I saw it, but I still remember it because it struck me, just like that head by Fabritius in Rotterdam. If I remember rightly, that nude woman in the La Caze Collection is also very fine, also from the later period. The fragment of Rembrandt’s anatomy lesson, yes, I was astounded by it too. Do you remember those flesh colours? It’s — OF THE EARTH, particularly the feet.
   Listen — Frans Hals’s flesh colours are also earthy, that’s to say in the sense you know. At least often. There’s also sometimes — I almost dare say always — a relationship of contrast between the tone of the clothes and the tone of the face. Red and green are opposed — the singer (Dupper), who has carmine tones in the flesh colour, has green tones in his black sleeves, and ribbons on those sleeves in a different red from that carmine. The orange, white, blue chap I wrote about has a relatively neutral complexion, earthy, pink, violetish, by contrast with his Frans Hals yellow leather suit. The yellow chap — dull lemon — definitely has dull violet in his mug. Well — the darker the garb the lighter the face, sometimes at least (not by chance) — in his portrait and that of his wife in the garden, there are two black violets (blue violet and reddish violet), and a solid black (yellow-black?) — repeat — reddish violet — and blue violet-black and — black — in other words the 3 most sombre things — well then — the faces are — very fair — extraordinarily fair, even for Hals. Anyway — Frans Hals is a colourist among the colourists, a colourist like Veronese, like Rubens, like Delacroix, like Velázquez. Millet, Rembrandt and, for instance, Israëls — it has sometimes rightly been said of them that they are — harmonists rather than colourists. But — tell me — black and white, may one use them or not? Are they forbidden fruit? I think not. Frans Hals must have had twenty-seven blacks. White — but you know yourself what singular paintings some modern colourists purposely made with white on white. What does that phrase mean, one may not? 
   Delacroix — called them rests, used them as such. You mustn’t be prejudiced against them, because provided they’re in their place and in balance with the rest, one may use all tones — that goes without saying. Do you know that I often think the things by Apol, say, in white on white, are very good. His Sunset in the Haagse Bos, for instance, which is in Amsterdam. That thing is actually deuced fine. No — black and white, they have their reason and significance, and anyone who suppresses them won’t get it right. The most logical, certainly, is to regard them both as — neutral. The white the very highest combination of the lightest possible red, blue, yellow — black the very lowest combination of the darkest red, blue and yellow — I have nothing to say against that statement, I think it absolutely true. Well — the light and shade — the tone in terms of value — is directly related to that 4th spectrum from white to black. After all, where one has: 


Spectrum 
1
 
from  
yellow
 
to 
violet


,,
2
 
,,
red
 
,,
green


,,
3
 
,,
blue
 
,,
orange


–––––––
 
–––––––––––––––––––––––––––––


Sum a fourth spectrum
that of the neutral 
      tones, that of red + blue + yellow
,,
white
red + blue + yellow.
      the most extreme light
 
to
black
red + blue + yellow.
      the most extreme black 


 
   That’s how I, for my part, understand the blacks and whites. If I mix red and green to a reddish green or greenish red, 

by adding white I then get


 
Pinkish green or greenish pink.



      
    And, if you will, by adding black,


 
brownish green or greenish brown.

 Isn’t this clear? If I mix yellow with violet to a lilac yellow or yellow lilac, in other words to a neutralized yellow or a neutralized lilac, by adding white and black I get greys. So. There is primarily a question of greys and browns when one makes colours lighter or darker, whatever their nature and their red, yellow or blue content may be. To my mind, speaking of light and of dark greys and browns is expressing it correctly. But how fine what Silvestre says about Delacroix is — that he took an accidental tone on his palette, the unspeakable shade, purplish, that he put that tone down somewhere, either for the highest light or for the deepest shadow, but made something of that mud that either glittered like light or was as sombrely silent as deep shadow. For instance I’ve heard of an experiment with a sheet of neutral coloured paper — which became greenish on a red background, reddish on a green one, bluish on orange, orangish on blue, yellowish on violet, and violetish on yellow. 
   Listen — suppose one wants to make a muddy tone or snot colour like this look light in the painting, what Delacroix said — that Veronese could paint a blonde, nude woman with a colour like mud so that she looked white and blonde in the painting. Question — how is such a thing possible except by opposing great forces in blue-blacks or violets or reddish browns? You — who look to see whether you can find dark shadows somewhere and think that if the shadows are dark, indeed black, then it’s no good, are you right? I think not. For — then Delacroix’s Dante, say, the Zandvoort fisherman, say, are no good, for they really do have the strongest forces of blue or violet blacks in them. Rembrandt and Hals, didn’t they use black? And Velázquez??? Not just one, but twenty-seven blacks, I assure you. So that — ‘not allowed to use black’, come on, do you actually know yourself what you mean by it? And what you want to achieve by it? Really think about it, because you could well come to the conclusion — I regard this as highly likely, that you have learnt and understood the question of — tones — wrongly, or rather have learnt them vaguely and understood them vaguely. There are so many people like this; most people are like this. But you’ll discover it eventually through Delacroix and others of that period. Tell me — have you thought that those studies of mine that have black backgrounds have been pitched very low IN THEIR LIGHTS??? And so where I pitch my study lower than in nature I still maintain the relationship between the tones, since I become darker not only in my shadows but also proportionally IN MY LIGHTS TOO? I made my studies specifically as gymnastics, to fall and to rise in tone — so — don’t forget this, that I painted my white and grey moss literally with a mud colour, and that it nonetheless looks light in the study. Adieu, regards. Yours truly, Vincent These things that relate to complementary colours, to simultaneous contrast28 and to the way complementaries neutralize each other, this question is the first and foremost. The other is — the effect on each other of two similar colours, for example a carmine on a vermilion, a pink lilac on a blue lilac. The third question is a light blue against the same dark blue, a pink against a brown red, a lemon yellow against fawn yellow, &c. But the first question is the most important. And if you find some book or other on colour questions that is good, do be sure to send it to me, for I too know far from everything about it, and go on searching every day. My dear Theo, I read your letter about black with great pleasure. And it convinces me accordingly that you aren’t prejudiced against black.  Your description of the Manet study, The dead toreador, was well analyzed. And the whole letter proves to me the same as your croquis of Paris made me think at the time, that if you put your mind to it you can paint something in words. It’s certain that by studying the laws of colours one can move from an instinctive belief in the great masters to being able to account for why one likes what one likes, and that’s very necessary nowadays when one considers how terribly arbitrarily and superficially people judge. You must just let me maintain my pessimism about today’s trade, because it definitely does not imply despondency. This is how I reason to myself. Suppose that I’m right when I increasingly see something like tulip mania in the curious haggling about the price of paintings. Suppose, I say, that like tulip mania at the end of the previous century, the art trade, with other branches of speculation, were to disappear at the end of this as it came, that’s to say relatively quickly. Tulip mania may have perished, BULB-GROWING REMAINS. And for my part I’m content, for better or worse, to be a little gardener who loves his nursery. Presently my palette is thawing, and the bleakness of the earliest beginnings has gone. I still often run up against a blank wall when undertaking something, but all the same, the colours follow one another as if of their own accord, and taking a colour as the starting-point I see clearly in my mind’s eye what derives from it, and how one can get life into it.
   Jules Dupré is like Delacroix in landscape, for what enormous diversity of mood he expressed in symphonies of colour. Now a seascape, with the most delicate blue-greens and broken blue, and all sorts of pearly tones. Then an autumn landscape with foliage from deep wine red to vivid green, from bright orange to dark havana, with yet more colours in the sky in greys, lilacs, blue, white, forming another contrast to the yellow leaves. Then again a sunset in black, in violet, in fiery red. Then again more capricious, like the corner of a garden by him that I saw and have never forgotten; black in the shadow, white in the sun, bright green, a fiery red, and then again a dark blue, a bituminous greenish brown and a light brownish yellow. Truly colours that can have quite a lot to say to one another. I’ve always idolized Jules Dupré, and he’ll become even more recognized than he is now. For he’s a real colourist — always interesting, and with something so powerful and dramatic. Yes, he is indeed a brother to Delacroix. As I said, I think your letter about black very good, and what you say about not doing it in the local colour is also correct. Still, it doesn’t satisfy me. To my mind there’s far more behind not doing it in the local colour. True painters are the ones who don’t do it in the local colour — that was what Blanc and Delacroix discussed once.  May I not simply understand by it that a painter does well if he starts from the colours on his palette instead of starting from the colours in nature?
   I mean, when one wants to paint a head, say, and one looks closely at the nature one has before one, then one might think, this head is a harmony of reddish brown, violet, yellow, all broken — I’ll put a violet and a yellow and a reddish brown on my palette, and break them into each other.  I retain from nature a certain sequence and a certain correctness of placement of the tones, I study nature so as not to do anything silly, to remain reasonable — but — I don’t really care whether my colours are precisely the same, so long as they look good on my canvas, just as they look good in life. Truer by far is a portrait by Courbet, manly, free — painted in all sorts of beautiful, deep tones of reddish brown, of goldish, of colder violet in the shadow, with black as a foil, with a little piece of tinted white linen as a rest for the eye9 — finer than a portrait by anyone you will — who has imitated the colour of the face with hideous precision. A man’s head or a woman’s head, looked at very composedly, is divinely beautiful, isn’t it? Well then — with painfully literal imitation one loses that general effect of looking beautiful against one another that tones have in nature; one preserves it by re-creating it in a colour spectrum PARALLEL to, but not necessarily exactly, or far from the same as the subject. Always and intelligently making use of the beautiful tones that the paints form of their own accord when one breaks them on the palette, again — starting from one’s palette — from one’s knowledge of the beautiful effect of colours, isn’t the same as copying nature mechanically and slavishly.
   Now here’s another example. Suppose I have to paint an autumn landscape, trees with yellow leaves. Very well — if I conceive it as — a symphony in yellow, what does it matter whether or not my basic yellow colour is the same as that of the leaves — it makes little difference. Much, everything comes down to my sense of the infinite variety of tones in the same family. If you think this a dangerous tendency towards romanticism, a betrayal of ‘realism’ — painting from the imagination12 — having a greater love for the colourist’s palette than for nature, well then, so be it. Delacroix, Millet, Corot, Dupré, Daubigny, Breton, 30 more names, do they not form the heart of this century where art is concerned, and all of them, do they not have their roots in romanticism, even if they surpassed romanticism? Romance and romanticism are our era, and one must have imagination, sentiment in painting. HAPPILY, realism and naturalism are not free of them. Zola creates, but doesn’t hold a mirror up to things, creates them amazingly, but creates, poetizes. That’s why it’s so good. So much for naturalism and realism, which are NONETHELESS related to romanticism. And I still say that I’m touched when I see a painting from the days of 30-48, a Paul Huet, an old Israëls like the Zandvoort fisherman, a Cabat, an Isabey. But I find that saying, don’t paint the local tone, so very true — that I would far rather see a painting with lower values than nature than one that’s exactly the same as nature.
   Rather a watercolour that’s somewhat vague and unfinished, on the other hand, than one that has been worked up to capture reality. That saying has a broad meaning — don’t paint the local tone — and leaves the painter free to seek colours that form a whole and are related to one another, which comes out all the more through contrast to another series. What do I care that the portrait of a worthy citizen tells me precisely what the milk and water, pinkish, purplish, nondescript colour of the pious man’s face — which I’d never seen — is? But the fellow citizens of the little town where the individual in question made himself so estimable that he felt it incumbent upon him to keep posterity familiar with his physiognomy — are very edified by the speaking likeness. COLOUR EXPRESSES SOMETHING IN ITSELF. One can’t do without it; one must make use of it. What looks beautiful, really beautiful — is also right. When Veronese had painted the portraits of his beau monde in the The marriage feast at Cana, when he had devoted to it all the richness of his palette in sombre violets, in magnificent golden tones — 
   then — there was still a faint azure and a pearly white he thought of — which doesn’t appear in the foreground. He flung it on at the back — and it was right, changed of its own accord into the surroundings of marble palaces and sky that singularly complete the array of figures. That background is so magnificent in that it came about of its own accord, spontaneously, from a colour calculation. Am I wrong about this? Isn’t it painted differently from how someone would do it who had thought about the palace and about the figures at the same time? As a single whole? All that architecture and sky is conventional and subordinate to the figures, calculated to make the figures show up well. That is truly painting — and the result is more beautiful than precise imitation of the things themselves. Thinking about one thing and letting the surroundings belong to it, derive from it. Making studies from nature, wrestling with reality — I don’t want to argue it away. I’ve tackled it that way myself for years and years, almost fruitlessly 
   and with all sorts of sad results. I wouldn’t want to have missed that — error. Always carrying on in the same way would be folly and stupid, that’s what I mean — but not that all my effort has been utterly in vain. One begins by killing, one ends by healing is a doctors’ saying. One begins by fruitlessly working oneself to death to follow nature, and everything is contrary. One ends by quietly creating from one’s palette, and nature is in accord with it, follows from it. But these two opposites don’t exist without each other. Swotting, even if it’s apparently in vain, gives a familiarity with nature, a sounder knowledge of things. And a fine saying of Doré’s, who’s sometimes so clever! is I remember. Although I believe that the finest paintings are made relatively freely from the imagination, I can’t break with the idea that one can’t study nature, swot even, too much.
   The greatest, most powerful imaginations have also made things directly from reality that leave one dumbfounded. In reply to your description of the study by Manet, I’m sending you a still life of an open, hence an off-white Bible, bound in leather, against a black background with a yellow-brown foreground, with an additional note of lemon yellow. I painted this in one go, in a single day. This to show you that when I say that perhaps I haven’t swotted entirely for nothing I mean it, because these days it really comes quite readily to me to paint a given object, whatever the shape or colour may be, without hesitation. Lately I made several studies outdoors, of the autumn landscape. I’ll send you the still life and one of these autumn studies soon. I’ll write again in the next few days anyway, and send this letter in haste to say that I was very pleased with what you say about black. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I just received your letter and the enclosed, for which many thanks. Wanted to reply to you straightaway that I repeatedly came across sayings by Diderot, and also think that he’s perfectly in tune with his age. With him it’s as it is with Voltaire himself; if one reads a letter from these fellows, preferably about the most prosaic things or about nothing, there’s an alertness and a sparkling spirit in them that charm. Let’s not forget that they made the Revolution, and it took genius to carry their age along with them and to get minds that are epicene and passive to strive in one direction towards a goal. So I have every respect for them. You’ll shortly receive two studies of the autumn leaves, one in yellow (poplars) — and the other in orange (oaks). I’m utterly preoccupied with the laws of colour. If only we’d been taught them in our youth! But most people’s story, through a sort of fate, is to have to seek the light for a long time. For it’s absolutely certain that the laws of colour, which Delacroix first ordered and put forward in full and in context to the general benefit — as Newton did gravity and as Stephenson did steam — that these laws of colour are a light.
   I’ve also made another autumn study of the pond in the garden at home. There’s definitely a painting in that spot. I did already try to get it out once last year. The one I’ve made now is something of a stiff composition; two trees (orange and yellow) on the right, two bushes (grey-green) in the middle, two trees (brownish yellow) on the left. In front — the pond, black — foreground of withered grass. Background, a glimpse over the hedge onto a very bright green. A sky to harmonize with this in terms of power, in slate-grey and dark blue. They’ll6 certainly think it too black and too dark, but the time when one makes dark studies is always too short. I’m enclosing the book by Charles Blanc7 in the crate with the studies — also a Bible they gave me for you at home, of which I made a still life. Don’t let it bother you if I just leave the brushstrokes on my paintings as they are, with smaller or larger protrusions of paint. This doesn’t mean a thing — if 
   one leaves them a year or so (or half a year is enough) and scrapes over them quickly with a razor blade, one gets much more permanency of colour than would be the case if the paint were put on lightly. If a painting is to remain good and keep its colours, it’s important that the light areas, in particular, are painted on heavily. And both the old masters and the French painters of today have done this scraping off. I believe that glazes of a transparent colour often sink in altogether and disappear over time if they’re applied before the painting in its preparatory phase is thoroughly dry, but applied later, they really do endure. You yourself made the observation that the colour of my studies in the studio got better rather than worse over time. I think this comes from putting the paint on heavily, where I don’t use any oil. When it’s a year old, the little oil that the paint always contains has sweated out and then one gets the good, solid impasto. That’s a question — painting so that it hardens properly — that it rather comes down to, to my mind — it’s a pity that some enduring colours like cobalt are so expensive.
   I don’t know what to think about the chromates and madder, but I can well imagine that some, particularly American, sunsets — you know those sorts of paintings that are obtained with glazes of chromates — last a terribly short time. Daubigny and Dupré, on the other hand, endure. Isn’t it curious that the Vermeer of Delft in The Hague has retained its colour so magnificently, with a whole series of strong tones of red, green, grey, brown, blue, black, yellow, white? The painting by Haverman in Amsterdam that you’ll remember — (as not good) is badly painted, fatally badly with a view to time, I fear. I just mention it because he, so they say, is awfully respected precisely for his technique. But — it’s painted, well I’d say like, for instance, Ary Scheffer or Delaroche painted in terms of technique — and — lovers of sound, good, powerful work have always had quite a lot to say about that. Now those paintings smoothed out with oil &c. are cracking horribly — I noticed it in the Fodor. Yet Silvestre says that Delacroix drenched his paintings with oil — ‘bathed them in oil’12 — but — what I do imagine is that this was heavily impasted work, first worked up in full impasto, then left for a year — and then, if the paint had perhaps became rather too dull and rough — yes — then Delacroix will have saturated those paintings with oil later — but only after they were dry to the core. Then it can’t do any harm. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent Hasn’t there been a Lhermitte this month? I’m really looking forward to De Goncourt. My dear Theo, I received De Goncourt’s book yesterday evening. I started reading it right away, and although I’ll obviously have to read it again quietly, I already had a general view of the whole thing by this morning — you can see I’d really been looking forward to it. I don’t think he praises Boucher too much. Even if I knew nothing of Boucher but the contrast of these three things, a rich blue (sky), a bronze (male figure) and a mother-of-pearl white (female figure), particularly with the addition of that anecdote about the Duchess of Orleans, I would admit that he is someone in the world of painters. What’s more, he doesn’t praise him too much, because he does come out and say, vulgar — in the way that one can call the paintings of Bouguereau, Perrault &c. vulgar without selling the worthy gentlemen short. Because they lack a certain poignancy and intimacy, don’t they? What’s more he doesn’t praise Boucher too much, to my mind, because I’m not concerned for one moment that De Goncourt would deny the superiority of Rubens, say — Rubens, who was still more productive even than Boucher, no less than him but even more the painter of nude women.
   Which in Rubens very often does not detract from the poignancy and intimacy that I mean, particularly not in those portraits of his wives in which he is, or surpasses, himself. But Chardin. I’ve often longed to know something about the man. (Watteau was exactly as I thought.)3 Third Estate. Corot-like as far as bonhomie is concerned — with more sadness and adversity in his life. It’s a splendid book. La Tour witty and Voltaire-like. Pastel is a process I’d really like to know. I’ll do it later, too. If one can paint a head, one must be able to learn it in a few hours. I greatly enjoyed what he says about Chardin’s technique. I’m more and more convinced that the true painters didn’t finish in the sense in which people all too often used finish — that’s to say clear if one stands with one’s nose pressed to it. The best paintings — precisely the most perfect from a technical point of view — 
   seen from close to are touches of colour next to one another, and create their effect at a certain distance. Rembrandt persisted in this despite all the trouble he had to suffer as a result (the worthy citizens thought Van der Helst much better for the reason that one can also see it close to). In that respect, Chardin is as great as Rembrandt. Israëls has something of the same, and for my part I always find Israëls admirable, specifically in his technique. It would be too good if everyone knew this and thought about it like this, as Bonnemort would say. At the same time, to bring this off one has to be able to do a little magic, which costs one dear to learn, and Michelangelo’s gloomy, sarcastic words — my manner is destined to make great fools9 — is also true of those who dare take risks in regard to colour — there, too, it can’t be imitated by the cowards and the dependent. I believe I’m making progress with the work. Yesterday evening something happened to me that I’ll tell you as precisely as I can. You know the 3 pollard oaks at the end of the garden at home — I slogged away at them for the 4th time. I’d sat in front of them for three days with a canvas the size of that cottage, say, and the peasant cemetery you have.
   The thing was the canopies of Havana-coloured leaves — how to model them and get the form, the colour, the tone. Then one evening I took it with me to that acquaintance of mine in Eindhoven, who has quite an elegant drawing room (grey wallpaper — furniture black with gold), where we hung it. Well now, never before have I felt such a conviction that I’ll make things that work, that I’ll succeed in calculating my colours such that I have it in my power to create an effect. That was Havana, soft green and white-grey — even pure white straight from the tube. (You see that for my part, even though I talk about dark, I have no prejudice against the other extreme, the utmost extreme even.) Although the man has money, although he really liked it — I had such a tingle of good spirits when I saw that it worked, that it created a mood as it hung there because of the soft, melancholy peace of that colour combination — that I COULD not sell. But because it had affected him, I gave it to him, and he accepted it just as I meant it, without many words, that’s to say little other than — ‘the thing’s damned good’. I don’t yet think so myself — I must first see some more Chardin, Rembrandt, Old Dutch and French fellows and really think things over — because I want to work even more vigorously with rather less paint than I used in this thing, for instance. Now as to my acquaintance and his opinion of paintings — if someone with a clear, rational mind paints still lifes and works outside day in and day out, even if it’s only for a year, then he may not be an art expert as a result, 
   then he doesn’t yet feel himself to be painter — but — nonetheless sees more coolly than many another. And then there’s also this about him, that his character is not like just anyone’s. For instance, he was originally supposed to have become a clergyman — at a certain moment flatly refused — and — got his way in that, which by no means everyone in Brabant succeeds in doing. And has something generous and loyal about him. This is something Zola once referred to — when in a conversation between Mouret and his school friend, he makes Mouret get serious and say that it has taken him a great deal of effort to overcome that time and its influence in himself, but that he wanted to live and that he was living. Many who endeavour to change slip back, don’t get any further than a certain colourless Methodism because they don’t take any measures vigorously enough. But that’s not the case with him; he is a man in his bourgeois world. Did you know that the De Goncourts made etchings and drawings? You mustn’t think I’m being impractical if I decidedly go on trying to encourage you either to draw or to paint. I know you won’t fail. I know if you put your mind to it, the result wouldn’t be petty. And specifically in the trade, specifically as an art expert, it would give you an ascendancy over many others. 
   An ascendancy that one actually does need. I return for a moment to that acquaintance of mine — it’s exactly a year since I saw him for the first time, when I was making that large sketch of a water mill which you possibly know. (The colour of that one is just maturing nicely.) Now here’s a description of a study by that acquaintance of mine — some roofs, backs of houses, factory chimneys, dark against an evening sky. That evening sky blue, shading at the horizon into a glow, between clouds of a smoky colour with orange, or rather, reddish reflections. The bulk of the houses dark, but still a warm brick colour, a silhouette that has something sombre and threatening about it. Foreground a vague bit of ground in the twilight, black sand, withered grass, a garden anyway, with a few dismal black apple trunks in it, a small canopy of yellow autumn leaves on them here and there. He made this absolutely entirely of his own accord, but isn’t it a good concept, a real impression, well felt? But one isn’t a painter in a year, nor is that necessary. Only there’s already a good thing running through it, and hope is alive instead of one feeling powerless in front of a wall. I don’t know how things will go for me from now on. At the moment, when I read about that outstanding devil, that famous La Tour17 — 
   how real it is, by Jove — and — how well (apart from his terrible avarice)18 that fellow tackled life and — painting. I’ve only just seen Frans Hals — well now, you know how I was full of it, wrote to you at length about it straightaway, about putting things down in one go. Well, what a similarity there is between the ideas of La Tour &c. and Frans Hals, when they express life in pastel that one could blow away. I don’t know what I’ll do or how things will go for me, but I hope I won’t forget these lessons I’ve been taking recently: in one go, quickly but with absolutely total exertion of everything one may have in the way of spirit and attention. Nowadays — I like nothing better than working with a brush — drawing with it too — instead of making a design in charcoal. When I ask myself how the old Dutchmen set about it, I come up against the relatively few actual drawings. And how astoundingly they — draw. But — I believe that in most cases they began, they progressed, they ended — with their brush. They — didn’t fill in. A Van Goyen — for instance — I’ve just seen the one of his in the Dupper Collection, an oak tree on a dune 
   in a storm, and the Cuyp, view of Dordrecht. An astounding technique — but — with nothing and as if of its own accord and beyond the paint24 and — apparently perfectly simple. But — be it in the figure — be it in landscape — how painters have always striven to convince people that a painting is something other than nature in a mirror, something other than imitation, that’s to say re-creation. I would like to tell you a lot more about what Chardin, in particular, makes me think about colour — and — not making things the local colour. I think it’s splendid: ‘How to surprise — how to define the substance of this toothless mouth with its infinite subtleties. It’s made with nothing more than a few streaks of yellow and a few sweeping strokes of blue!!!’25 When I read this, I thought of – Vermeer of Delft. When one sees it from close to, the townscape in The Hague26 is incredible, and done with completely different colours from what one would suppose a few steps away. Regards, I really wanted to tell you right away how good I think De Goncourt’s book. 
 Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Would it surprise you very much if — let’s suppose the people at home intend to move between March and May next1 — would it surprise you very much if before that time — something were to happen to Ma? This thought sometimes occurs to me when I go there. It seems to me that there’s been a change recently. ‘Getting old’ is such a singular thing, and there are certainly a lot of instances where the wife doesn’t survive the husband very long. The change I’ve observed is that every so often Ma is much more lucid in her thinking, whereas in the last few months she has had long periods when it seemed to be rather clouded — which is really not to be wondered at. There’s been something harried about her for a while — as a result — I can well imagine — of the emptiness and feeling alone. Well — it struck me — that she’s become very calm and very composed — and something resolute has taken the place of fretting. There’s nothing more to see.
   I don’t consider it impossible — that death could also come to her unexpectedly and gently, much as with Pa and for similar reason. Since it struck me — and because Wil said when I spoke to her about it that she’d also noticed that Ma had changed rather a lot and that she too was anxious about it — I’m just writing to you about it. Otherwise, one would say, Ma looks very well. But there’s a certain something that makes me think of what I’m telling you. If Ma goes on a trip to Anna, to Amsterdam, to Cor before long2 — it seems to me that can’t do any harm, particularly since she seems to be set on it and is looking forward to seeing them all again. But it could well be that she herself has a presentiment that it will at the same time be a leave-taking.
   I had to pay my rent this month, and at the same time gave notice on my studio come May. The drawback to which is that because of the neighbours, as you know, I really lack privacy, and I observe that the people are still afraid of the priest — although perhaps he wouldn’t meddle in things any more. Still, given that there’s been trouble, the most straightforward thing is to make a change. What I did most recently is a rather large thing of an old mill on the bare heath, a dark silhouette against an evening sky. It goes without saying that I’d telegraph you if there were something at home. Now it’s an uneasiness that I feel — but then to an extent that I’m telling you about it. Since Ma still goes to see Van de Loo from time to time, he would tell us if there were anything to tell. But were it to be the same sort of death as Pa’s, that’s to say, sudden, it’s something that can just as easily 
   happen in a few days as in a few years. So — who can say? If the lucidity and calm last, for my part I expect a crisis after the trip, in other words before long — and a death without much struggle. But — it sometimes happens that the mind becomes rather clouded, then it drags on, and in that case there could still be much suffering and worry to struggle through. Think about this, whether I might be wrong in suggesting these two possibilities, either quickly without suffering, or the other. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I’ll just say again, so that you know what I’m basing this on, I didn’t see anything particular apart from this return of serenity from time to time, and that Ma looks well, considering. Rather too well, even, so that for my part I have my doubts. My dear Theo, I came across the following sentence that you’d underlined in the article on Chardin in De Goncourt’s book. After speaking about painters being badly paid, he says: ‘What to do, what to become. He must abandon himself to the inferior occupations or die of hunger. The first course is adopted’. So, he goes on to say, aside from a few martyrs, the rest ‘become fencing masters, soldiers or comedians’. That really has remained fundamentally true. Seeing as you’d marked the above, I considered it possible you might want to know what I intend to do next, especially since I’ve just informed you that I’ve given notice on my current studio. The present day isn’t entirely the same as Chardin’s, and nowadays there are a few things that are hard to argue away. The number of painters is much greater. Now it immediately makes a fatal impression on the public if a painter ‘does something on the side’. I’m not at all above that in this respect, I should say keep on painting, make a hundred studies, and if that’s not enough, two hundred, and just see if that doesn’t get you over ‘doing something on the side’. Then accustoming yourself to poverty, seeing how a soldier or a labourer lives and stays healthy in wind and weather with the ordinary people’s food and dwelling, is as practical as earning a guilder or a bit more a week. After all, one’s not in the world for one’s comfort and doesn’t have to be any better off than the next man. Being better off helps hardly at all — after all, we can’t hold on to our youth. If that were possible — but the thing that really makes one happy, being young and staying so for a long time — well, that isn’t here — that isn’t even in Arabia or Italy, although that is better there than here.
   And for my part, I’m of the opinion that one has the greatest chance of staying strong and renewing oneself — in today’s third estate. Anyway. So I’m saying that I seek to find it in painting, without ulterior motives. But — I’d do well, I think, to bear portrait painting in mind if I want to earn. I know it’s difficult to please people with a ‘likeness’, and I dare not say beforehand that I feel sure of my case. I certainly don’t consider it altogether impossible, though, because the people here will be much the same as people elsewhere. Well then, the peasants and the folk from the village aren’t mistaken and promptly say, even contradicting me if I say they’re wrong, that is Renier de Greef, that’s Toon de Groot4 and that’s Dien van der Beek5 &c. And sometimes even recognize a figure seen from behind. In town, the bourgeois folk, and certainly no less the tarts, no matter who they are, always value portraits. And Millet — discovered that ship’s captains actually ‘respect someone for it’ if he can do that (those portraits are probably intended for their mistresses ashore). 
   This hasn’t been exploited yet. Do you remember this in Sensier? I’ve always remembered how Millet kept himself going in Le Havre this way.  Well roughly, my plan is to go to Antwerp — I can’t possibly calculate the ins and outs beforehand. I’ve come by the addresses of 6 art dealers, so I’d want to take something with me and further, as to the work, I plan to paint a few views of the city as soon as I get there — reasonably large — — and show them straightaway too. In other words concentrate everything on doing something there. And going there poor, at any rate I can’t lose much. Now as regards here — I know the area and the folk too well and love them too much to believe I’m going for good. I’ll see about renting a place to store my things, and then I’m also covered should I want to leave Antwerp for a while — or should become homesick for the country. As for ‘doing something on the side’ — right from the outset Tersteeg, for instance, nagged me about it. And that was nagging, whatever else one may think of Tersteeg. Those who talk about it the most aren’t at the same time able to explain precisely what. And as to that, in order to clear the whole thing up in my case — if I did ‘something on the side’, then the only thing would be that, if I knew either dealers or painters, I would possibly do something with paintings, for instance by going to England for them &c. Things like this, which are obviously directly related to painting, are an exception, but otherwise, as a rule, a painter must be wholly a painter.
   Don’t forget, either, that I’m not cut out to be a melancholic. The nickname I have around here is generally ‘the little painter fellow’, and it’s not entirely without a measure of malice that I’m going there. I’ve also thought of Drenthe, though, but as more difficult to bring about. That would be good, though, should my work from the countryside be liked in Antwerp. If the things from here were liked, either now or later, then I would continue with them, and vary them with similar things from Drenthe. But the issue is that I can only do one thing at a time, that if I’m engaged in painting peasants, I can’t occupy myself with business in town. The present moment is ideal for breaking away, since I’ve had trouble getting models and am going to move in any case. As to that, it’s to be expected that there would never be an end to it in this studio right next door to the priest and the sacristan. So I’m changing that.
   But anyway, it doesn’t make an absolute impression on people, and by renting another room and letting things lie for a few months, the intrigue will lose a great deal of its force. Wouldn’t it be best if I could spend the next couple of months, December and January, there? In Amsterdam I lodged in a soup kitchen for 50 cents; I’d do the same there, or better yet reach agreement with some painter or other to be allowed to work in his studio. There’s another reason, too — that it’s not absolutely impossible I might find an opportunity somewhere to paint from the nude. They wouldn’t want me at the academy, nor probably would I — but — with a sculptor, say, there must surely be a few living there, one might readily find some sympathy. It goes without saying that people with money can get as many models as they want, but it’s a difficult matter without it. All the same, there must be people there who use nude models and with whom one could split the cost. I need it for many things.
   I received your letter while I was writing to you. I’m willing to go to Van de Loo if need be, only you know that doctors sometimes don’t tell you everything, particularly in doubtful cases. You should also understand that what I said about her being rather in a fog will probably recur, is a thing that most people who are getting old have. In any event I think it a very practical idea not to let her stay in the midst of the upheaval of the removal, unless she absolutely insists. For the rest, old chap, for my part I believe that Van de Loo has given Ma all, absolutely all the advice there was to give, and would say nothing new. I mean, he would already have given a warning if a danger that could be averted were threatening. But if he doesn’t say anything it’s a sign that, if there were something, he can’t do anything about it and nothing should be done about it; if he’s letting nature take its course, he’s doing it because that’s the best thing — Van de Loo is enormously scrupulous and — Zola-like cool and calm. Anyhow — I’ll speak to Wil about it, and either I may go there or Ma may come across Van de Loo sometime 
   when he’s in the village;9 we’ll do something. But I think it will just have to take its course. Now in such cases, you’ll agree with me, worrying and being overanxious is intolerable for the patient if she notices it. And with old people there’s often no way of predicting it, precisely because in so many cases their hearts aren’t normal, because of fatty degeneration, say, and they can just as easily go off suddenly as carry on for another 5, another 10 years. Emotion can have an effect, of course, but precisely because of this there’s much more chance of staying alive if the mind is no longer all too clear, than in periods of lucidity. Something else — I’m quite sure that, from time to time at least, there’s definitely a substratum of deep thoughts in Ma (for her inner life, her life of the mind is fairly complicated and has levels or layers) that she neither wants to nor could express. In many cases she was rather silent, so — I for one would rather say that I don’t always know everything about her. Particularly now that she’s lucid, letting her do as she wants is certainly the easiest, firstly for her and secondly the most sensible for us.
   Silently understanding how it would by no means be a misfortune for her were it to be that she didn’t live very much longer and departed without much suffering, serenity is justifiable in this regard. Serenity too, though, were it to be that years of relatively mechanical life remained. You see that I wanted to arrange my going to Antwerp at around the same time as their trip, which will be over around February. Between then and their final move, I’ll either be back in Nuenen or — if something exceptional detained me longer, nonetheless always ready to be present right away if something happened. This must go off, but I’ll write in a few days and tell you what I’ve arranged with Wil. I’ll suggest she goes to Van de Loo with Ma before the trip; that would go without saying for Ma. Once Van de Loo has seen her, that will be the moment for either Wil or me to ask Van de Loo outright whether he can say anything about her life expectancy. For my part, depending on what you and Wil think about it, I’m willing to prepare Van de Loo before Ma’s visit, and tell him what we’d like to know, so that he gives her a really thorough examination. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent Write soon and tell me what you think about my going to Antwerp — I don’t believe there’s anything against it. My dear Theo, I’ll tell you in a few words what Van de Loo said about Ma. He says 

1)  
that there’s nothing wrong with her


2) 
that she can live for another 10 years or so


3) 
that if she dies before that time, then she would 


have to have contracted some disease or other.


 Lastly, he seemed to find it very natural that she was sometimes a little bit dazed, and didn’t make anything of it. So she can do whatever she likes and doesn’t have to feel awkward about travelling or moving house. So much the better, then. In any event it’s reassuring. Because for my part I believe what he says, and with the good care that Ma gets thanks to Wil there’s little chance of ‘contracting some disease or other’. Wanted to let you know straightaway. It’s reassuring for me, too.
   I’m really looking forward to Antwerp now. The first thing I’ll do there will probably be to go and see Leys’s paintings in his dining room, if one can see them. You know, that Walk on the ramparts and the one that Bracquemond etched, The table, The servant. I imagine that it’ll be beautiful there in the winter, too, with snow on the docks. Obviously I’ll take a few paintings with me, and they’ll be the ones that I would otherwise have sent to you in the next few days. A large mill on the heath in the evening, and a view of the village behind a row of poplars with yellow leaves, a still life5 and a number of drawings of figures. I’m at something of a stand with the work here at present. It’s freezing hard, so it’s no longer possible to work outdoors. It’s better if I just don’t use any more models as long as I’m living in this house; at any rate not until I come back. Besides, I’m saving my paint and canvas so as to have ammunition there.
   SO THE SOONER I CAN GET AWAY, THE BETTER. I recently received a letter from Leurs about my paintings. He wrote that Tersteeg and Wisselingh had seen them and thought them ‘not suitable for them’. All the same, I maintain that I’ll make people change their minds — even if Tersteeg and Wisselingh don’t want to. I’ve just read a few books in the style of Gigoux’s Souvenirs, which my friend in Eindhoven9 had sent for, in which I found some very interesting things about the fellows of those days, starting with Paul Huet. And which give me confidence that I haven’t tackled nature the wrong way, nor the technique of painting, although I freely admit that I will and must still change. There you have those heads that are with you, there must be good ones among them, I’m as good as certain of it. So — let’s go. I don’t think this winter will be dull. It’s obvious that it’ll mainly be a question of working hard. But there’s something singular in the very idea that one has to take the plunge. I’m taking a stock of the paint that I can easily get ground here myself12 — but it’ll help me if I can find a few more colours in a better quality there. I’m also taking at least 40 stretching frames the same size as those studies of heads that are with you. And drawing materials and paper so that, however I get on, I’ll always be able to do something.
   Because I’ve worked entirely alone for years, I imagine that although I will and although I can learn from others and even adopt technical things — all the same I’ll always see through my own eyes and tackle things originally. However, nothing could be surer than that I’ll try to learn more things. And if I can — particularly the nude figure. I imagine, though, that in order to get models, as many as I want and good, I won’t be done all at once, but will have to find the money for it by making other things. Be it landscapes, be it townscapes, be it portraits, as I said — or — even if it were signboards and decoration. Or — something I didn’t mention in my last letter among the things that I could do ‘on the side’ — give lessons in painting, letting them begin by painting still lifes — which I believe is a different method from that of the drawing masters. I’ve tried it out on those friends of mine in Eindhoven, and I’d dare repeat it. I’ll certainly leave immediately, as soon as I get the monthly allowance from you. And as to that, should you by chance be in a position to send it a week earlier, I’d leave a week earlier. It goes without saying, though, that I’m not counting on it. I’m glad that I went to see the museum in Amsterdam once more before this, because I’ve seen from the work since that what I saw there has been useful to me. Write soon if you have time. I wanted to tell you Van de Loo’s opinion of Ma straightaway.
   Since I’m already busy packing up my things, it goes without saying that my thoughts are more there than here. Here I’ve just kept on ceaselessly painting in order to learn painting, to get firm ideas about colour &c., without leaving much room in my head for other things. But when I escaped to Amsterdam for a few days, I was really delighted to see paintings once again. For it’s sometimes damned hard to be entirely away from paintings and the world of painters and not to see anything by other people. Since then I’ve had quite a yearning to get back into it, at least for a while. If one’s entirely out of it for a couple of years and wrestles with nature, that can sometimes help, and at the same time one perhaps gets a new stock of confidence and health out of it, which one can under no circumstances have too much of, though, because the painter’s life is often harsh enough.
   As regards my work, I’ll have to act according to circumstances, I mean, if I could perhaps make the acquaintance of an art buyer and persuade him to show some of my things. But tomorrow doesn’t mean never, and you’ll soon see something of it, particularly if I succeed in making new studies of heads or figures. The one landscape I’m taking with me — and possibly both — but the one with the yellow leaves: I think you’d like it too. I enclose a quick croquis of it. The horizon is a dark line against a light line of sky in white and blue. In this dark line little flecks of red, bluish and green or brown, forming the silhouette of the roofs and orchards, the field greenish. The sky higher up, grey, against it the black trunks and yellow leaves. Foreground completely covered with fallen yellow leaves, in which 2 little black figures and one blue. On the right a birch trunk, white and black, and a green trunk with red-brown leaves. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
    My dear Theo, Many thanks for the 50-franc note and your letter. You’ll understand why I’m leaving next Tuesday1 when you realize firstly that I’m really longing to go — secondly that I’m in danger of becoming stuck with my work here for want of models, while working outdoors has stopped because of the cold. As regards my certainly feeling the lack of a studio in Antwerp, yes, that’s so. But I have to choose between a studio without work here, and work without a studio there. I took the latter. And with pleasure that’s actually so great that it feels to me like a return from exile. After all, I’ve been out of the world of painting altogether for a long time. And in the meantime my powers have matured somewhat, so that I feel more independent of the usual intrigues to chuck someone out. I mean that in The Hague I was weaker than the rest with a brush, I don’t say in my drawing, and by attacking me on the painting and colour, I was more easily confounded than will prove possible now. As for Rubens, I’m very much looking forward to him, but — don’t you often find that in terms of conception, 
   in terms of the sentiment in his religious subjects, Rubens is theatrical, even badly theatrical? Look here — take Rembrandt — Michelangelo — take Michelangelo’s Pensieroso. Meant to be a thinker, isn’t he? But — his feet are small and swift, but — his hand has something of the lightning speed of a lion’s paw, and — that thinker is at the same time a man of action, one sees that his thinking is concentration, but — in order to leap up and to act in one way or another. Rembrandt does it differently, his Christ in the Pilgrims at Emmaus is above all a — soul in a body that is anyway not the same as a torso by Michelangelo, but yet — the gesture of persuasion, there’s something powerful in it3 that — well, just put a Rubens next to it, one of the many figures of meditative people — and they become folk who’ve retired into a corner for the purposes of aiding their digestion. Thus with everything religious or philosophical he is flat and hollow, but what he can do is — women — like Boucher and better — it’s precisely there that he 
   gives one most to think about and is deepest. What he can do — colour combinations — what he can do is — paint a queen, a statesman, well analyzed, just as they are. But the supernatural, where magic begins, no — unless it’s putting a certain something infinite into a woman’s expression, which isn’t dramatic, though.  I found a passage about Gainsborough that has once more encouraged me to work in one go — look. It’s this brusqueness of touch that gives so much effect. The spontaneity of his impression is there in full, and communicates itself to the viewer. What’s more, Gainsborough had a perfect method of ensuring that his compositions formed a whole. He laid down his painting in one go as a rough sketch, and worked it up harmoniously from the top to the bottom, without focusing his attention on small fragments, without getting involved in the details, because he was looking for the general effect and almost always found it, thanks to this broad view of the canvas, which he looked at as one looks at nature, in a single glance. 
   Since I don’t know where I’ll be staying, I’d ask you to address the letter Poste restante when you write on 1 December, unless I notify you before that. Because I’ll certainly write in the next few days. I found the enclosed sonnet by Jules Breton in a Revue.  Again, as regards my relatively sudden departure from here, if I hadn’t had any trouble with the models, I would have spent the winter here. But in practice, continuing to work with models here didn’t so much run up against opposition from the priest, which would have been neutralized by being absolutely ignored on my part right away, had that been all there was to it, but the wretched thing is that, although I have the courage to oppose him, the people hesitate and are more frightened than I’d expected. And I won’t undertake it unless I can be sure that they have the courage. If I go away for a few months now, that might help, and if it doesn’t help, then none of those I paid something for it every week last winter will earn anything from it this winter. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent I’ll send you the book by Charles Blanc8 etc. from Antwerp as soon as I can put a few studies in with it. 
   Ruins Old men, when near them, week by week,  Time has ravaged fruits and flowers in turn, Old men, like Roman cities, have in their hearts A forum – dead, with ruined temples strewn. A silent waste through which their souls Parade at length their barren tedium; where box and nettle And the solitary grass, across the ancient site Have choked the glory of its clamorous pomp. Where words effaced from speechless pediments Conceal their sense beneath the rusty stain of years. No more songs now – the birds love blossom-time. No rainbow prisms colouring the mists, But sober suns, immense horizons, Lighting the beauty at the ruins’ back. Jules Breton My dear Theo, Wanted to let you know that I’m in Antwerp and have already seen various things. I’ve rented a little room, rue des Images No. 194, above a paint merchant, for 25 francs a month. So when you write, please address your letter there instead of Poste restante. I’ll start by telling you that I’ve seen Leys’s dining room, you know The walk on the ramparts, The skaters, The reception, The table, and, on a panel between the windows, St Luke. To my surprise, the composition (at least so I imagine) was rather different — although I’ve not yet had an opportunity to compare the photos of the paintings — rather different from the definitive compositions. Then, it’s painted as a fresco — in other words on the plaster of the walls. Now frescoes actually should and can last for centuries, but these have already faded appreciably, and the one over the fireplace in particular (part of The reception) already has some cracks, too. Baron Leys’s oh so clever son has also made an improvement to this room by having a door enlarged, so that in The skaters the legs of the fellows standing on the bridge and looking 
         over the rail have been cut off, which creates a deplorable effect. Then the light in there is terribly bad — I imagine the room was originally painted to be used in lamplight. That’s why, because I really couldn’t see, I gave the maid a tip to light the chandelier and then I saw it better. After so much that left me rather disappointed — in the first place that the fresco colour, and, alas, bad fresco I’m afraid, isn’t what we’re accustomed to from Leys — after so much that disappointed me — superb nonetheless. The girl, the woman by the bakery, the lovers and other figures in The walk on the ramparts — the bird’s eye view of the city, the silhouette of the towers and roofs against the sky, bustle of skaters on the frozen moat — superb in manner. Have also seen the museum of old paintings and the Musée Moderne. I agree with you that the figures in the foreground — those heads — in the Christ in Purgatory are very fine, 
   finer than the rest, that’s to say the central figure. Those 2 blonde women’s heads, above all, are prime quality Rubens. I was particularly struck by the Frans Hals, The fisher boy. M. de Vos, portrait of guild patron. Rembrandt very fine, two small Rembrandts that are perhaps not by R. but by N. Maes?? or someone. Jordaens, As the old sing. Van Goyen.S. Ruysdael. And the Quinten Massys. The drawing of St Barbara by Van Eyck. &c. Musée Moderne, the large Mols is Mesdag-like, probably with smears by Vollon in it (Vollon knew him well). Braekeleer, not the bad one, a Brabant inn, curiously good, fine landscapes by C. de Cock, Lamorinière, Coosemans, Asselbergs, Rosseels, Baron, Munthe, Achenbach, a fine Clays27 — two old Leys, one Braekeleer-like, another romantic, the latter fine. A fine portrait by Ingres, a fine portrait by David, yet more fine things, also horrible affairs like — life-sized cows by the God-fearing Verboeckhoven, etc. But — I’ve seen extraordinarily little in the shops, virtually nothing — one little painting not even as big as a hand, as good as Raffaëlli, otherwise nothing special, and I’m afraid that the trade is categorically as quiet as the grave. Still — it’s a good 
   old Dutch saying — don’t despair. I like Antwerp, have explored various parts of the city, it’s authentic down by the wharves. Well — it can’t do any harm to know Antwerp a little, though it’ll probably be the same as everything and everywhere, that’s to say disillusioning, but yet with its own subtle distinctions. And besides, it’s good to have a change sometimes. Regards, write soon if you will. Yours truly, Vincent Saturday evening My dear Theo, Wanted to write to you with a few more impressions of Antwerp. This morning I went for a really good walk in the pouring rain, an expedition with the object of fetching my things from the customs office. The different entrepôts and hangars on the wharves are very fine. I’ve already walked in all directions around these docks and wharves several times. It’s a strange contrast, particularly when one comes from the sand and the heath and the tranquillity of a country village and hasn’t been in anything but quiet surroundings for a long time. It’s an incomprehensible confusion. One of De Goncourt’s sayings was ‘Japonaiserie for ever’. Well, these docks are one huge Japonaiserie, fantastic, singular, strange — at least, one can see them like that. I’d like to walk with you there to find out whether we look at things the same way. One could do anything there, townscapes — figures of the most diverse character — the ships as the central subject with water and sky in delicate grey — but above all — Japonaiseries. I mean, the figures there are always in motion, one sees them in the most peculiar settings, everything fantastic, and interesting contrasts keep appearing of their own accord. A white horse in the mud, in a corner where heaps of merchandise lie covered with a tarpaulin — against the old, black, smoke-stained walls of the warehouse. Quite simple — but a Black and White effect. Through the window of a very elegant English inn one will look out on the filthiest mud and on a ship where such delightful wares as hides and buffalo horns are being unloaded by monstrous docker types or foreign sailors; by the window, looking at this or at something else, stands a very fair, very delicate English girl. The interior with figure wholly in tone, and for light — the silvery sky above that mud and the buffalo horns, again a series of contrasts that’s quite strong. There’ll be Flemish sailors with exaggeratedly ruddy faces, with broad shoulders, powerful and robust, and Antwerp through and through, standing eating mussels and drinking beer, and making a great deal of noise and commotion about it. Contrast — there goes a tiny little figure in black, with her small hands pressed against her body, slipping soundlessly along the grey walls. 
   In a frame of jet-black hair, a little oval face, brown? Orange yellow? I don’t know. She raises her eyelids momentarily and looks with a slanting glance out of a pair of jet-black eyes. It’s a Chinese girl, mysterious, quiet as a mouse, small, like a bedbug by nature. What a contrast to the group of Flemish mussel eaters. Another contrast — people passing along a very narrow street between formidably tall houses. Warehouses and stores. But down at street level, alehouses for all nations with the corresponding male and female individuals. Shops selling food, sailors’ clothes, colourful and bustling. This street is long, one keeps seeing authentic scenes, and once in a while there’s a commotion, louder than usual, when a quarrel breaks out. For instance, you’re walking along, looking around, and suddenly a great cheer goes up and all sorts of shouting. In broad daylight a sailor is being thrown out of a brothel by the girls and pursued by a furious fellow and a string of girls. Of whom he is apparently terrified — at any rate, I saw him scramble over a pile of sacks and disappear through a window into a warehouse. Once one’s had enough of this racket — at the end of the berths where the Harwich and Le Havre boats lie — having the city behind one — one sees — in front of one, nothing, absolutely nothing but an infinity of flat, half-flooded pasture, incredibly sad and wet, undulating dry reeds, mud — the river with a single small black boat, water in the foreground grey, sky misty and cold, grey — silent as a desert. The overall effect of the port or of a dock — sometimes it’s more tangled and fantastic than a thorn-hedge, so tangled that one can find no rest for the eye, so that one gets dizzy, is forced by the flickering of colours and lines to look now here and now there, unable to tell one thing from another even after staring at a single spot for a long while. But if one goes to a place where one has an indistinct piece of land as a foreground — then one gets the most beautiful, quiet lines and those effects that Mols, for instance, often gets.
   Now one sees a girl who is magnificently healthy and, at least seemingly, very sincere and innocently cheerful, then a countenance so slyly malicious that one is frightened by it as if by a hyena. Not forgetting the faces ravaged by the pox, the colour of boiled shrimp, with little dull grey eyes and no eyebrows, and sparse, greasy, thin hair, colour of pure pig’s bristle or slightly yellower — Swedish or Danish types. It would be good to work there — but how and where? Because one could run into trouble there exceedingly quickly. All the same, I did roam around a whole lot of streets and alleys without mishap, even sat and talked very genially with various girls, who evidently took me for a bargee. I don’t consider it impossible that I might be able to come by some good models by painting portraits. Today I got my things and tools — which I was eagerly awaiting. And so I have my studio in order. If I could come by good models at virtually no expense I wouldn’t be afraid of anything. I don’t reckon it a bad thing, either, that I haven’t any money, as much as it would take to force things by paying. Perhaps the idea of painting portraits and getting the sitters to pay for them by posing is a safer way. Because in the city it’s not like it is with the peasants. Anyway. One thing’s certain, Antwerp’s a very singular and beautiful place for a painter. My studio’s quite tolerable, mainly because I’ve pinned a set of Japanese prints on the walls that I find very diverting. You know, those little female figures in gardens or on the shore, horsemen, flowers, gnarled thorn branches.  I’ve reconciled myself to having left — and hope not to be idle this winter. Well, it’s a relief to me to have a little cubby-hole where I can work in bad weather. It’s pretty obvious that I shan’t exactly be living in the lap of luxury these days.
   See that you send your letter off on the first, because I’ve got enough bread in until then, but after that I’d be in a real stew. My little room isn’t bad at all, and it definitely doesn’t look dreary. Now that I have the 3 studies I brought with me here, I’ll set about going to the picture dealers, who mostly seem to live in private houses, though, no shop windows on the street. The park6 is beautiful, too. I sat there drawing one morning. Well — I’ve had no setbacks so far. I’m safe and sound as far as accommodation is concerned, for by forking out a few more francs I’ve acquired a stove and a lamp. I shan’t easily get bored, I assure you. I’ve also found OCTOBER by Lhermitte, women in a potato field in the evening, magnificent. Not yet November, though. Have you kept up to date with that, by any chance? I’ve also seen that there’s a Figaro Illustré with a fine drawing by Raffaëlli. You know my address is 194 rue des Images, so please address your letter there, and the second volume of De Goncourt10 when you’ve finished it. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent It’s curious that my painted studies look darker here in the city than in the country — is this because the light isn’t as bright anywhere in the city? I don’t know — but it might differ more than one would say on the face of it. It struck me, and I could understand that things that are with you also appear darker than I thought they were in the country. Still, the ones I’ve brought with me now don’t look bad all the same — the mill — avenue of autumn trees and still life, and a few small ones. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and 150 francs enclosed. Wanted to tell you that I’m glad to have come here. I painted 3 more studies last week; one of the backs of old houses — seen out of my window1 — two in the park. I’ve exhibited one of them at a dealer’s. Furthermore, I’ve also left what I brought with me from the country with two others on commission. At a fourth I can exhibit a view of the wharf as soon as the weather allows me to paint it, because he had a Mols that he wanted something to show alongside. Furthermore, I got another address from the last of them, where he assured me I’d be well received. Now these dealers aren’t the biggest in Antwerp, but all the same I saw at all of them, among much that I didn’t like, such things as appealed to me, for instance at one a painting by Van Goyen and a study by Troyon, at another a Mols and tiny little Dutch paintings — at another that little painting which I told you was like Raffaëlli — it’s by Moormans5 — and some good watercolours — at another various good seascapes by young Belgians. I saw very few figures, and I consequently intend to try to paint some figures.
   The address that the dealer in question gave me is actually that of one of the large dealers (Nicolié)6 who don’t have a shop window but hold their exhibitions in a private house. I want to take figures there, though. Then I’ve also discovered useful sources for paint &c., where I’ll be able to get things quite cheaply. I’ve also hunted out Linnig, whom you mentioned in the summer when I asked you if you knew people in Antwerp — but he has nothing but a few miserable old paintings; paints himself rather like Vertin, but seemed to me to be a discouraged man in so far as he ever had any courage, which I reckon wasn’t much. All these gentlemen, though, are complaining bitterly that nothing’s moving. Still, that’s not news. I hope to go and see the painting you write about before long. I’ve been busy going backwards and forwards, though, and still am, tracking down those fellows, and at the same time hunting for models, too. That last is always terribly difficult, but I’ve done it elsewhere and so I’ll manage here too. I have an appointment for tomorrow with a splendid old man — will he come??? 
   Today I got my stock of paint that they forwarded to me from Eindhoven and paid for it, more than 50 francs. It’s hard, terribly hard to keep working when people don’t buy, and literally to have to pay for one’s paint out of what wouldn’t be excessive just for food and drink and lodgings alone, living frugally. And on top of that, the models. Anyway. Still, there’s a chance, and a good one even, for there are relatively few people working at present. To my mind they’re only half to blame for this (for the other half they are) because it’s sometimes too tough. And yet they build national museums costing hundreds of thousands and similar things, but meanwhile the artists sometimes starve. But be all this as it may, I needed to look into things for myself, and the chance of doing something isn’t less but rather a great deal more than I’d imagined. I’ve seen various photographs of Jan van Beers’s work. Some of his things are done with a great deal of character. But I imagine that someone like Manet, say, is very much more of a painter than Van Beers, and does it better, more artistically. If only I knew my way around here rather better, if only I could get the models I saw! Yesterday I was in the Scala café concert, something like the Folies Bergères10 — I thought it was tedious and hackneyed, of course, but — I amused myself looking at the audience. 
   There were magnificent women’s heads, really extraordinarily fine, among the worthy bourgeois folk in the back rows, and on the whole I find what they say about Antwerp true indeed, that the women are good-looking here. Ah! I’ll say it again, if I could only get the models I want! What leaves me quite cold are the mass of German girls, all manufactured from a single model one would say, that one sees at the café concerts. It seems that one sees that same breed everywhere nowadays, like Bavarian beer. It seems to be an article that’s exported in bulk. I’m bored to tears by all these German elements that lurk wherever one goes these days. It’s sure to be just the same in Paris, with the Boches worming their way in everywhere. Anyway, it’s a boring thing to talk about. Seeing some paintings by other people has given me all sorts of ideas for when I’m back in the country in the spring; at the same time my confidence to carry on with all the strength at my disposal is being boosted in general. Antwerp is a beautiful colour, and it’s worthwhile for the subjects alone. One evening I saw a popular dance for sailors &c. down by the docks — it was quite charming and all very respectable. That won’t be the case at all these dances, though. No one there was drunk, for instance, nor did anyone drink much. 
   There were very good-looking girls there, the best-looking of whom was ugly. I mean, a figure that struck me like an amazingly beautiful Jordaens or Velázquez or — Goya — was one in black silk, probably some inn landlady or other, with an ugly and irregular face, but with vivacity and piquancy à la Frans Hals. She danced excellently in an old-fashioned manner — among others, once with a well-to-do little farmer type who had a large green umbrella under his arm, even while he was waltzing amazingly fast. Other girls were wearing ordinary jackets and skirts and red scarves — the sailors, cabin-boys &c., quite charming. Retired ship’s captain types who came to watch. Extraordinarily authentic. It does one good to see people who are really enjoying themselves. Well, you can see that I’m not sitting idle — but I can’t stress enough how terribly difficult it is to be short of money. My best chance is in figures because there are relatively very few who do it, and I must make the most of this chance. I have to work my way in here, until I come into contact with good figure painters — Verhaert, for instance, and then portrait painting, I imagine, will be the way to earn something for grander things.
   I feel a power to do something within me. I see that my work holds its own against other work, and that gives me an incredible desire to work; and lately, when I was in the country, I was starting to have doubts precisely because I noticed that Portier seemingly doesn’t care for it any more. I’d be able to do more if I were better off. But I’m partly dependent on my purse as far as production is concerned. I also have an idea for a sort of shop sign14 that I hope to carry out. I mean, for instance, still lifes of fish for a fishmonger, for flowers, for vegetables, for a restaurant. It seems to me that if one took well-arranged subjects — large — 1 metre by 1/2  a metre or 3/4, say, a canvas like that would cost me 50 francs, no more — even 30 francs with luck, and it would be worth trying to make a few. This much is certain, I want to be seen — we may have to lose heart later, 
   but we’ll manage to put it off for a long while. Do write to me again if you have time. The end of the month would certainly be hard unless you can give me a little support then. For me, so much may depend on my being able to stick to my guns. And one can’t afford to look hungry or wretched. On the contrary, one must see to it that one helps to liven things up. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Just wanted to write and tell you that I’ve pressed ahead with models. I’ve made two fairly large heads by way of a trial for a portrait. Firstly that old man I already wrote to you about — a type of head in the style of V. Hugo’s2 — then I also have a study of a woman. In the woman’s portrait I’ve introduced lighter tones in the flesh, white tinted with carmine, vermilion, yellow, and a light background in greyish yellow, from which the face is separated only by the black hair. Lilac tones in the clothes. Rubens is certainly making a strong impression on me. I find his drawing immensely good, by which I mean the drawing of heads and hands in themselves. I’m utterly carried away, for instance, by his way of drawing the features in a face with strokes of pure red or, in the hands, modelling the fingers with similar strokes. I go to the museum quite often and then look at little else but a few heads and hands by him and Jordaens. I know that he isn’t as intimate as Hals and Rembrandt, but those heads are so alive in themselves. I probably don’t look at the ones that are most generally admired. I look for fragments such as those blonde heads in St Theresa in Purgatory.
   I’m also looking for a blonde model just because of Rubens. But you mustn’t take it too much amiss of me when I tell you that I can’t manage on my money for this month. I’ve bought some more paint and two new types of drawing brush which I’m extremely pleased with and with which I can work more accurately. Then the canvases I brought with me were too small for the heads, since using other colours means I need more room for my surroundings. All this and the models are ruining me. I’m telling you this as urgently as possible, because if one has to lose time, one loses double. Towards the end of the month, when I’ve done a few more heads, I hope to make a view of the Scheldt, which I’ve also got a canvas for. If the weather’s bad I can go into an inn at St Anne, which is right opposite the rise where the Church of Our Lady is. Other painters have been there before.
   I’m very glad to have come here, because it’s useful and necessary for me for many things. I’ve made the acquaintance of Tyck, the best paint manufacturer here, and he was very obliging in giving me information about some colours. The greens that persist, for example. For instance, I asked him things about Rubens’s technique, to which he replied in a way that proves to me that he analyzes well, which is doing something that not everyone thinks of, and which is nonetheless a very useful thing. Now what else shall I tell you? Oh yes — I’ve seen two collections of modern paintings. Firstly what was bought at the exhibition for the lottery, and then a collection of paintings that was sold. That’s why I saw various fine things, two studies by Henri de Braekeleer, you know that he has nothing to do with the old De Braekeleer, I mean the one who’s a famous colourist and analyzes rigorously — Manet-like, at any rate as original as Manet. One was a woman in a studio or other interior with Japanese objects, the woman had on a costume, yellow and black. Flesh colour, white and carmine. All sorts of strange little tones in the surroundings. The other was a half-finished study of a landscape.
   Flat, faded yellow fields as far as the eye could see, a black cinder road with a canal alongside it crossing them. Above a sky of lilac, grey, with accents of carmined lilac. Far distant a small red (vermilion) note of a roof and two little black trees. So nothing, and yet I found a lot because of the singular feeling for contrasting colours. I also saw an old study by Degroux, Woman by a cradle, something like an old Israëls. What else shall I tell you about these new paintings? I think many of them very fine, and by that I mean precisely the work of the Colourists or those who try to be, who look for mother-of-pearl-like combinations everywhere in the lights. Only for me, it’s by no means always that — it’s too contrived and I’d rather see a simple brushstroke and a less contrived, less difficult colour. More simplicity, in a word that knowledgeable simplicity which isn’t afraid of frank technique. I like Rubens precisely because of his straightforward manner of painting, his working with the simplest means. I don’t count Henri de Braekeleer among those seekers of mother-of-pearl everywhere, for with him it’s a strange, a very interesting endeavour to be literally true, and he stands very much on his own. Also saw various grey paintings, among others a printer’s workshop by Mertens, a painting by Verhaert of his own studio, where he sits etching and his wife stands behind him, De la Rivière, an Amsterdam undertaker after the funeral18 — very fine in the blacks, a Goya-like conception — that tiny little painting was masterly. Landscapes and Seascapes — saw very fine ones — in both collections.
   But as regards paintings — it’s the fisher boy by Frans Hals, Rembrandt’s Saskia, a number of countenances by Rubens, smiling or weeping, that come most to my mind. Ah — a painting has to be painted — and why not simply? If I look at life itself now — I have similar impressions. I see the people in the street — very well — but I often find the servant girls so much more interesting and beautiful than the ladies — the labourers more interesting than the gentlemen. And I find a power and vitality in those common girls and fellows which, to express them in their singular character, would have to be done with a firm brushstroke, with a simple technique. Wauters understood that, at one time anyhow, for I saw nothing by him this time. What I find so fine about Delacroix is precisely that he reveals the liveliness of things, and the expression and the movement, that he is utterly beyond the paint. And — well — many of the fine things I saw — although I think they’re good, often it’s much too much paint. At the moment I’m getting more and more accustomed to talking to the models while I’m painting, so as to keep the liveliness in their faces. I’ve discovered a woman who formerly — she’s old now — when living in Paris — provided models for painters, for Scheffer, Gigoux, Delacroix, she says for instance, and to another one who was painting a Phryne. Now she’s a washerwoman and knows a lot of women, and would always be able to provide them, she says. It has snowed, and first thing this morning the city was beautiful in the snow — splendid groups of street-sweepers.
   It’s a good thing I came, because I’m already full of ideas — for when I’m back in the country, too. I read an article by E. Bataille, I think it was in L’Etoile Belge, reprinted from Le Figaro, about the situation in Paris, an article that gave me the impression of being very sound, but according to him affairs in general are really bad. In Amsterdam, contrary to the opinion of Dutch journalists, this Mr Bataille also expressed himself pessimistically about the state of affairs in Holland. As far as the art trade is concerned — here, as I already wrote, the dealers are complaining — sheer destitution. And yet — I believe that so much more might still be done. To mention just one thing — in the cafés, the restaurants, the cafés chantants — one sees no paintings, at least as good as none. And how this goes against nature! Why aren’t there any still lifes hanging there, in the way Fijt, Hondecoeter, so many others made splendid decorations in the old days? Why — if girls are what they want — no portraits of women? I know that one has to work cheaply for such purposes, but one can work relatively cheaply. Pushing the prices high is the ruin of the trade and makes it as quiet as the grave. Anyway. Regards, do write again between times if you will. As to the money, do what you can, but know this, that we have to do our utmost to succeed. And I’m not abandoning my idea of the portraits, because it’s a cause worth fighting for to show people that there’s something else in human beings besides what the photographer is able to get out of them with his machine. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   I’ve noticed the many photographers here, who are much the same as everywhere and apparently have plenty to do. But always the same conventional eyes, noses, mouths, waxy and smooth and cold. It still always remains dead.  And painted portraits have a life of their own that comes from deep in the soul of the painter and where the machine can’t go. The more photographs one looks at, it seems to me, the more one feels this. My dear Theo, Today, for the first time, I feel rather dejected1 — I’d made a painting of Het Steen2 and took it round the dealers. Two of them were out, and one didn’t like it, and one lamented in a dreadful manner that literally no one had set foot in his shop in a fortnight. This isn’t very cheering, particularly when the weather’s cold and bleak, and one has already broken into one’s last 5 franc piece and is faced with a fortnight in which one sees no way ahead. But anyway. Only see that you keep me going for this fortnight because I want to get something more in figures. I heard it said this morning, though, that quite a few of those paintings I wrote to you about3 were sold privately. A figure of 21 thousand was mentioned. I don’t know whether it’s true. But in any event it was crowded with visitors when I saw it, and the exhibition for the lottery was crowded, too. If they showed more and better things, more would sell. But the shops look grim.
   The painting of Het Steen is quite elaborate, and I’ll make another one from a different point on the quay. All the same, I’d so much rather paint figures — I also think that the market could get rather full of landscapes, and although one has far more difficulties with figures because of the models — all the same, it may be a better chance. What the dealers say is that they still think women’s heads or figures of women are most likely to sell. This spring I’ll have to decide whether or not I’ll stay in the Nuenen area. I’d like you to give the question some thought. I really can’t understand why Portier, having expressed himself so clearly about my work — has since apparently become deeply indifferent. I won’t make progress if I have to spend more on paint than I receive. And for myself I’m no better, literally no better off than I was years ago when I spent that winter in Brussels. I had 50 francs less then, but painting costs much more than 50 francs, and has to be laid out immediately.
   I don’t feel dejected as long as I’m painting, but in the long run — the periods in between can sometimes be very depressing. And it grieves me when I can’t develop things a little, and one’s always between the devil and the deep sea. For you have to understand, for instance, that ever since I’ve been here I’ve only had some hot food 3 times, and that otherwise it’s always just bread. Thus one becomes more of a vegetarian than is good for one. Particularly when it had to be the same in Nuenen for a good six months, and I still couldn’t even manage to settle my paint bill. Painting is expensive and one has to paint a lot. I have a half promise of getting a model for a portrait; I’ll try to push that through. Now, what I can’t understand is that someone like Portier, say, like Serret — if they can’t sell — don’t at least come up with an idea to market work. Listen Theo, something else — I believe that it won’t seem incomprehensible to you that I don’t have the slightest desire to write to the people at home while they’re with my charming sister Anna and other members of my family who are also so charming to me. As I’ve received a letter from Ma, who asks me to write and said she’d asked you for my address, will you let them know that I won’t write, which for that matter I already made quite plain when I left? You’ll understand when something happens as it did in March, it’s one of those things that is decisive. 
   I left the house then &c. It follows automatically that, since they got their way, I hardly think about them at all, hardly at all; for that matter don’t want them to think about me either. Certainly it’s an unfortunate thing that it has to be like this. But then there are those memories like, for instance, that until the end Pa also spoke and acted towards me, yes, like the priest. Don’t they understand that themselves — that precisely when one has ceased to be angry about it, it has definitely become a matter of stranger than strangers to one another? Tell Ma this if you like, for I don’t wish to be harsh to her, but I don’t intend to start writing. And Ma is old, so I don’t want to write that I won’t write in a sharp way. It’s been the same with other painters, too, and there are things one shouldn’t meddle with any further. At the museum there’s a portrait of Delaroche, painted by Portaels. How important he12 seemed in life. How hollow and empty he proved to be later. Manet and Courbet, who didn’t seem to be serious during their lifetimes, how much so they actually were as painters. By a curious chance, an accident to Delaroche’s portrait has left it with a hole in the middle of the forehead. It looks good and actually seems to belong there. Ah — there’s a very curious race of people whom one wouldn’t think at certain times are indeed absolutely and utterly hollow and empty. One can be mistaken. And it’s a relief when one realizes that one has been mistaken — even if one then has to start from the beginning again. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I painted another head today1 — of a model whom I couldn’t pay, though — but being able to get it, I took it anyway. I’ve also now had a definite promise that I’ll make a portrait of someone, and then two studies for me in return. I have to tell you, though, that I’m really hard pressed now — out of the near enough five francs that I still had — I had to buy two canvases for those two portraits, and my laundry has just come back. So that at the moment I have a few centimes left. So what I’m urgently asking you is: for God’s sake don’t put off writing, and send me a lot or a little, such as you have — but know that I’m starving, literally. If I succeed in getting 50 or so heads together, there’s a chance of getting work, that is to see about being employed by the photographers, which I wouldn’t want in the long run, but would do if needs must. The photographers seem to have plenty to do here. One also sees painted portraits in their shops, which they apparently work up on a background obtained by photography, which obviously has a weak, feeble effect to anyone who knows what painting is. It occurs to me now that one could get very much better colours if one worked with studies painted directly from life from the photographs that people want to see painted. And after all, at any rate this is one of the chances of earning something that one might have.
   But whatever I want to begin and where — I have to be able to show things, that goes without saying. Since I need all my high spirits, all my energy — putting it bluntly, I dread feeling physically weak. I’ve been to see someone else with my view of Het Steen, who thought the tone and colour good, who was in a state of confusion drawing up his inventory and is in small premises, though, but where I could3 go back after the New Year. It’s a good thing for when there are foreigners who want to have a souvenir of Antwerp, and for this reason I’ll make a few more in the same genre of townscapes. Yesterday, for example, I drew a few studies4 for a thing in which one sees the cathedral. And similarly I also have a small one of the Park. However, I’d rather paint people’s eyes than cathedrals, for there’s something in the eyes that isn’t in the cathedral — although it’s solemn and although it’s impressive — to my mind the soul of a person, even if it’s a poor tramp or a girl from the streets, is more interesting. I consequently believe that nothing helps one progress so directly as working with a model. Of course it’s a great problem to have to pay the models  we’re at a stage where it comes down to energy and 
   the paintings will have to be energetic in order to find buyers. I’m convinced that something can be done here. There seem to be a lot of beautiful women in this city, and it has to be the case that there’s money to be earned with either women’s portraits or imaginary women — heads and figures. It’s a real pleasure for me to work with a rather better type of brush, and to have cobalt and carmine and a good brilliant yellow and vermilion. The most expensive is still sometimes the cheapest. Cobalt especially — it can’t be compared with any other blue as regards the delicate tones that one can get with it. And the quality of the colour may not be everything in a painting, but all the same that’s what gives it vitality. As to whether or not I’d live here permanently — given that things don’t look exactly rosy in the art trade — and there seems to be something of a tendency for each painter to be his own dealer — which I imagine will increase still further in the long run — it might be wise to keep a studio here. If you have any thoughts or wishes about it, either for or against, let me know as frankly as possible. But it strikes me right away that — if you should ever get to the point of working for yourself, independently of the Goupils, either sooner or later — 
   Antwerp could perhaps be a place where, given the poor displays there are now, by exhibiting properly quite a lot could be done that the other houses don’t understand. Furthermore — It’s relatively easy to go back and forth to England from here. Why — for the trade — are all paintings always in frames? As a commercial article there’s surely sometimes a lot to be said for something’s being light and easy to handle and to move. The trade is old-fashioned and... thrice mouldered. There has to be renewal — and the old systems don’t exactly work well any more. The prices — the public — everything needs renewing. And the future is working cheaply for the bourgeoisie, perhaps. At any rate — the ordinary art lovers themselves seem to be getting more and more set, becoming hard. Anyway. Starting with capital so often only leads to losing everything first, and thus one’s courage and zest for work, too. Whereas starting with virtually nothing at least makes someone more decisive and firmer of character. Anyway. Regards — but see that you write to me by return, for I have a faint sensation in my body because I’ve exerted myself rather a lot on this and that, and I need my strength. Regards. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, It’s high time that I thanked you for the 50 francs you sent, which enable me to get through the month, even if starting from today it’s pretty much the same again. But — there are a few more studies done, and I believe that as much as I paint, I also progress by as much. As soon as I received the money I got an attractive model and painted a life-size head. It’s all light except for the black hair. Even so, the head itself stands out in tone against a background in which I’ve tried to get a golden gleam of light. Here, by the way, is the colour spectrum — a tonal flesh colour, more bronzy in the neck. Jet-black hair — black that I had to make with carmine and Prussian blue, dingy white for the jacket, light yellow, much lighter than the white, for the background. A touch of flame red in the jet-black hair and a second flame-red bow in the dingy white. She’s a girl from a café chantant and yet the expression I was looking for is a little Ecce Homo-like. But precisely as to expression, although I add my own thoughts, I nonetheless endeavour to remain true, see what I wanted to get into it. When the model came to me, she’d evidently had a few busy nights — she said something that was entirely typical — for my part, champagne doesn’t cheer me up, it makes me very sad. Then I knew what to do, and I tried to get something voluptuous and sad at the same time. I’ve now started a second study of the same one, in profile. Furthermore, I’ve done that particular portrait that I told you I was in discussions about, and a study of that head for myself.
   And now I hope to paint a man’s head too, during these last days of the month. I’m in really good spirits, particularly as regards the work, and it’s useful for me to be here. I imagine that, no matter what these girls may be, one can make one’s money out of them like this sooner than in any other way. There’s no gainsaying that they can be damned beautiful, and it’s in keeping with the spirit of the age that this is the very kind of painting that wins the day. From the most elevated artistic viewpoint possible, there’s likewise nothing to be said against — painting people, that was the old Italian art, that was Millet and that is Breton. The question is simply whether one takes the soul or the clothes as one’s starting-point, and whether one allows the form to serve as a clothes-horse for bows and ribbons, or whether one should regard the form as a means of expressing an impression, a sentiment, or whether one models for modelling’s sake because it’s so infinitely beautiful in itself. Only the first is transitory, and the two latter are both high art. Something that pleased me greatly is — that the girl who posed for me wants a portrait from me for herself, preferably just like the one I did.
   And that she’s promised to let me paint a study of her in a dancer’s costume in her room, as soon as she can. Which isn’t possible right now because the man at the café where she works is opposed to her posing, but since she and another girl are going to share rooms, both she and this other girl will want their portraits. And I sincerely hope that it turns out that I do get her back, because she has a remarkable head and is lively. I have to practise, though, because it certainly comes down to dexterity — they don’t have much time or patience — for that matter, the work doesn’t have to be any the worse if it’s put down virtually in one go, and one has to be able to work even when the model doesn’t sit stock still. Anyway. You see that I’m working with a will. If I sold something so that I earned a little more, I’d be able to put even more strength behind it. As to Portier — I’m not abandoning hope yet — but poverty is snapping at my heels and at the moment the dealers are all suffering somewhat from the same ill, that of being more or less a breed withdrawn from the world. They’re all too sunk in gloom, and how can one be very inspired to go scratching around in that indifference and that apathy — particularly since this disease is contagious. For it’s just nonsense to say that there’s nothing to be done, but one has to work all the same with aplomb and with enthusiasm, in short with a certain fire.
   And as to Portier — you told me yourself that he began the first of the exhibitions of the Impressionists and was overwhelmed by Durand-Ruel. Well, one would have to infer from this that he has the initiative not just to say something but to do something. But it could be to do with his being 608 — and — anyhow perhaps his case is one of the many cases when, at the time when there was a craze for paintings and trade was good, a mass of intelligent people were pushed aside in the jubilation, as if they signified nothing and could do nothing — because they couldn’t bring themselves to wholly trust the sustainability of the sudden painting craze and the huge rise in many prices. NOW — when business is slow, one sees the same dealers who, a few years ago — let’s say 10 years ago — were very enterprising — to some extent becoming a breed withdrawn from the world. And we aren’t at the end yet. Personal initiative with little or no capital is perhaps the seed for the future. Anyway. Yesterday I saw a large photo of a Rembrandt I didn’t know — which struck me amazingly — it was the head of a woman. The light fell on breast, neck, chin and the tip of the nose — the lower jaw. Forehead and eyes in shadow from a large hat with feathers, probably red. Probably also red or a yellow in the little décolleté jacket. Dark background. The expression a mysterious smile like that of Rembrandt himself in his own portrait where Saskia sits on his knee and he has a glass of wine in his hand. My thoughts are full of Rembrandt and Hals at the moment, not because I see many paintings by them but because I see so many types among the people here who remind me of that age. I still often go to the dance halls to see these women’s heads and sailors’ or soldiers’ heads. One pays 20 or 30 centimes to go in and drinks a glass of beer — for there’s little drinking — and can amuse oneself exceedingly for a whole evening — at least I can — watching the folk’s high spirits.
   What I have to do, and the only thing that can be sure to help me progress, is work a great deal with models. I notice that my appetite has been kept in check for rather too long and that when I received the money from you I couldn’t stomach any food — but I’ll see about remedying it. That doesn’t alter the fact that I have all my energy and clarity when I’m working. But when I’m outdoors, working in the open air is too much for me and I get too weak. Painting is something that wears one down anyway. Van de Loo told me, though, when I went to see him shortly before I came here, that I’m reasonably strong after all. That I needn’t despair of reaching the age that’s necessary for producing a body of work. I told him that I knew several painters who, despite all their nerves etc., had reached 60, even 70, fortunately for them, and that I would like to reach that too. Then I believe that if one seeks serenity and retains a zest for life, the frame of mind one’s in helps a lot. And in this respect I’ve gained by coming here, because I have new ideas and I have new means of expressing what I want, because better brushes will help me, and I’m really carried away by those two colours, carmine and cobalt. Cobalt — is a divine colour, and there’s nothing so fine as that for putting space around things. Carmine is the red of wine, and it’s warm, spirited as wine. So too is emerald green. It’s false economy to do without them, those colours. Cadmium likewise. Something regarding my constitution that has pleased me very much is that a doctor in Amsterdam, whom I also once spoke to about a few things that sometimes made me think that I wouldn’t last long 
   and whose opinion I didn’t ask directly, but just to find out the first impression of one who didn’t know me at all — taking advantage of a minor illness that I had to turn things to my constitution in general during the course of the conversation — it pleased me very much indeed that this doctor took me for an ordinary workman, said ‘you must be an ironworker by trade’. You see precisely what I’ve been trying to change in myself — when I was younger it could be seen that I over-exerted myself intellectually, and now I look like a bargee or someone who works in the iron trade. And changing one’s constitution such that one becomes ‘as tough as nails’ is no easy matter. I must take care, though, and see that I keep what I have, and gain still more. You really must still write and tell me whether it seems such an absurd idea to you that one might create a bit more courage if one were to plant a seed for a business. As regards the work I’m doing now — I feel that I can do something better — I need more air and space, though. I mean I must be able to expand it a bit. Above all, above all, I still haven’t got enough models. I can produce work of a higher quality, but my expenses would be heavier. But isn’t it so — shouldn’t one search for something high — for the real, for something distinguished? The women’s figures I see among the people here make an enormous impression on me — far more to paint them than to have them, although I’d actually really like both. I’m re-reading the book by De Goncourt again, it’s excellent. In the preface to Chérie, which you’ll read — there’s an account of everything that the De Goncourts experienced — and of how, at the end of their lives, they, yes — were pessimistic — but certainly felt sure of their ground — felt that they’d done something, that their work would last. What fellows they were! If we could get on more than now, could be more in agreement — why not then — us too?
   Apropos — on account of I will, after all, have some 4 or 5 fast days of pretty well everything at the end of this year — send your letter off 1 January and no later. You might not be able to understand it, but it’s true — when I receive money, my greatest hunger, even if I’ve fasted, isn’t for food, but is even stronger for painting — and I set out hunting models right away, and I carry on until it’s gone. Meanwhile, the lifeline I cling to is my breakfast with the people where I live, and a cup of coffee and bread in the crémerie in the evening. Supplemented, when I have it, by a second cup of coffee and bread in the crémerie for my dinner, and otherwise some rye bread that I have in my case. As long as I’m painting it’s more than enough for me, but when my models have gone, a feeling of weakness comes over me. I really like the models here because they’re so very different from the models in the country. And above all because the character is something so very different. And the contrast gives me new ideas, particularly for the flesh tones. And what I’ve now got in my last head is — not yet what I myself am content with but something different from the earlier heads. I believe that you sufficiently realize the importance of being true13 so that I can speak freely to you. For the same motives that when I paint peasant women, I want them to be peasant women — for the same reason, when they’re whores, I want a whore’s expression. That’s precisely why I was so enormously struck by a whore’s head by Rembrandt,
   because he had caught that mysterious smile so infinitely well with a gravity that he alone — the magician of magicians15 — can achieve. Now this is something new to me, and I want to get it at any price. Manet did it and Courbet — well, confound it, I have the same ambition because, moreover, I’ve felt to the core the infinite beauty of the studies of women by the very great people in literature, Zola, Daudet, De Goncourt, Balzac. Even Stevens doesn’t satisfy me because his women aren’t those whom I personally know anything about. And I think that he doesn’t pick the most interesting there are. Anyway, be that as it may — I want to make progress at all costs, and — I want to be myself. I’m feeling obstinate, too, and I’ve got over caring what people say about me or my work. It seems to be difficult to get a nude model here — at least the girl I’ve had wouldn’t do it. Obviously that — wouldn’t — is probably relative, but at any rate it can’t be taken as a matter of course. The thing is, though, she would be splendid. From the point of view of business, I can’t say anything other than that — we’re in what people are already beginning to call ‘the end of an era’ — the women have a charm as in a time of revolution — and just as much to say, for that matter — and that one would be withdrawn from the world if one worked without them. It’s the same everywhere, in the country and in the city — one must take women into account if one wants to keep up with the times. Adieu, best wishes for the New Year. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent  My dear Theo, It’s already late, but I don’t want to put off reporting the safe receipt of your letter and 150 francs. Before I forget — let me begin by replying to your recent question about the painting by Franck or Francken in St Andrew’s. Which I saw today. I think it a good painting — above all fine in sentiment — in sentiment it’s not very Flemish or Rubenesque. One thinks more of Murillo. The colour is warm, in a reddish spectrum as Jordaens sometimes is. The shadows in the flesh are very powerful, Rubens doesn’t have that and Jordaens often does, and in consequence there’s something mysterious in the painting that one can appreciate in that school. I couldn’t get near enough to examine the technique from very close to, which would have been worthwhile. The head of Christ is less conventional than the Flemish painters usually conceive it. I imagine, though, that I can do it like that too, and the painting didn’t tell me anything new. And since I’m not content with what I can do now and am trying to move forward in my work — enough — and move on to other paintings. What did strike me in that church was a sketch by Van Dyck? or Rubens? — a Descent from the Cross that was hanging high up but appeared to me to be good, a lot of sentiment in the pale body. This in passing. There’s a stained-glass window that I find superb — very, very remarkable. A shore, a green sea with a castle on the rocks, a sparkling blue sky in the most magnificent tones of blue, greenish, whitish, deeper, higher in tone. A huge three-master, whimsical and fantastic, silhouetted against the sky, breaking everywhere, light in the dark, dark in the light. In the blue a figure of the Blessed Virgin, bright yellow, white, orange. Higher up again, the window is dark green with black, with glowing red. Anyway — do you remember it? It’s very fine and Leys would certainly have fallen in love with it, or James Tissot in his old manner, or Thijs Maris. I saw a few paintings bought for the Musée Moderne, Verhas and Farasyn. Verhas, ladies riding on donkeys and fisher boys on the beach. Farasyn, a large thing of the old Antwerp Fish Market. Also an Emile Wauters — Cairo or somewhere, a marketplace. The Verhas works well, is a clever painting, in any event daring, with colours in a light spectrum, several fine combinations, including a figure in orange against light blue, light green and white.
   I’m still working on my portraits7 — and at last I’ve got two that are definitely ‘like’, a profile8 and a 3/49 That’s not everything, that’s not even the most important thing. All the same, it’s worth my while to seek it, and perhaps it helps one learn how to draw. Besides, I’m beginning to like portraits more and more. There you have some very famous Rubens — Virgin with the parrot10, Christ on the straw11 &c., but for my part I walk past them to look rather at that bold portrait of a man12 — painted with such a tremendously firm hand — still sketchy here and there — that hangs not far from the Saskia by Rembrandt. In a Descent from the Cross by Van Dyck, the one high up, the big one — there’s also a portrait, definitely a portrait — not just of a head but, thank God, of a whole figure. Superb — in yellow and lilacish — a woman, bending forward, who is weeping. The torso, the legs beneath the clothes really intimately executed and felt. What high art it is, when art is simply true. And an Ingres, a David, painters who really don’t always paint beautifully, how tremendously interesting even they become when, putting their pedantry aside, they forget themselves in — being true — in capturing a character — like in the two heads in the Musée Moderne. Anyway. Oh, if only one could get the models that one wanted!!! Now tell me — supposing first and foremost that you want to be a financier — and I have nothing against that, in fact I even highly approve of it — are you entirely happy with your own reasoning, when you say to me at the beginning of the year, to my disappointment: I have a very great deal to pay and you’ll just have to see that you manage until the end of the month? Listen, this is what I have to say against it, and just think about whether or not I’m right, at any rate that there are grounds for my reasoning: Am I less than your creditors? Who should wait, they or I??? if one of the two has to wait, which is in the nature of human things.
   A creditor is not a friend, that’s for sure, and, in case you don’t know it for sure, I am — at least perhaps. And do you have any notion how heavy the burdens that the work demands every day are for me, how hard to get models, how expensive the things needed for painting? Do you realize that it’s sometimes almost literally impossible for me to keep going? And that I must paint, that too much depends on pressing on with the work here with assurance immediately and without hesitation? A few weaknesses could make me fall in a way from which I wouldn’t recover for a long time. My situation is perilous on all sides and can only be won by working on determinedly. The paint bill weighs on me like lead and yet I must go forward!!! I have to keep people waiting, too — who will nonetheless get their money — but — are waiting; I’ve condemned a few of them to that. And without mercy, unless they give me credit. And the less credit, the more they’ll be made to wait. There’s no winning nowadays except with very good work, with things that are not mediocre. That higher standard costs more in money and — in difficulty and intense effort — yet this is the way, now more than ever. What I’m telling you is plain and simple. Do you or do you not understand that it makes perfectly good sense when I point out to you that, if I want to find work here making portraits, it’s an absolute necessity for me to have my studio full of — very good heads? This can be achieved, it’s something that one can see an end to, even if it’s not exactly easy to get them done.
   Shall we now say, like the damned bores and fools: we can’t, we haven’t any money, there’s nothing to be done? I tell you, no. This is what we’ll say — and say together, if you please. We’ll be poor for it personally and suffer want — as long as we have to — just as one does in a besieged city that one does NOT mean to surrender, but we’ll show that we are someone. Either one is brave — or one is cowardly. We must get to the point where we please the public — I mean, for example, the girls have to start liking their portraits. I believe that there are some who’d want them. I talked to a photographer’s assistant today about whether he couldn’t put some portraits my way. He wanted me to give him a commission for every girl he brought to me for a portrait. I let the matter lie, only in so far, though, as I didn’t promise any commission before and until I know this individual rather better. But I’ll probably see him again very soon. And then I’ll see whether I can do anything with him directly, or whether I’ll go and talk directly to his boss about it. But sometimes the assistant’s better, you’ll understand, it all depends. Now I told him that I didn’t know him and that I’d like to see whether he could do anything, but that I’d be taking a risk because I always have to incur my expenses for a portrait. Anyway I’ll pursue this — but what’s pressing — is that I should be able to show fine heads.
   I must also try to make some acquaintances among the girls, which is no easy task with a purse with little in it, I can assure you; one is by no means doing it for one’s pleasure. But it’s not the effort that I find daunting. Only, I believe that you’ve become all too, all too accustomed to thinking it perfectly all right for me always to be neglected, that you all too readily forget that for so many years I haven’t had what’s due to me. And that the desire I have to expand my affairs is good not just for me, but for you too, because it’s only by this means that we can earn. And now something else. Theoretically, at any rate, you say that it’s necessary to be able to appear well dressed and all the rest of it on certain occasions, when one has to visit people, etc. Well then, now is the time even according to me who is in no hurry to do it — as you know — that it’s beginning to come to this. Are such things necessary or not??? Does anything depend on them, yes or no??? Well, given this period of having to break through, the monthly allowance isn’t enough for me to possibly make do on it. You’re thrifty yourself; you can imagine what absolute necessities are. And I ask you, can one possibly do what’s absolutely necessary with what’s left for me after deducting painting materials, models, rent? If I had friends, were a little known, yes, then, then it would be easier — but I don’t have any and I have to make myself known. But I mustn’t forget to thank you for sending the second volume of De Goncourt. It’s a wonderful thing to be able to examine that era — from which there’s so much to be learnt for, to use the expression, our end of an era in which we are.
   I can’t tell you how delighted I still am that I came to Antwerp. And how much there is to observe here for me, who has been out of things for so long. How much good it does me — much as I love the peasants and countryside — to observe a city again. How the bringing together of extremes gives me new ideas — extremes, the countryside as a whole and the bustle here. I really needed it. Oh, if only I could make you understand how much more satisfaction you could have for yourself, how much more of a friend you would be to me — if, instead of the inflexible and cold neglect, and keeping me at a distance — think about last summer and previous summers! — you might at last come to the realization that this isn’t the way. Always to be in a state of exile, always hanging by a thread, always half measures. But anyway — the family stranger than strangers — is one fact — Holland behind me 2. THAT COMES AS QUITE A RELIEF. You see that’s my only feeling, and yet I had been so attached that at first the estrangement drove me mad, as it were. But I’ve seen through it all too well to hesitate. And I’ve recovered my self-confidence and serenity. The secret of that group — Delaroche-ishness, mediocrity. Backwards — it offends me. As to you — you’re still hovering between the two sides, and I’ve always said that your character still has to set in a definite form — that you still face an inner struggle and perhaps a struggle for your position in society, more serious than you have ever experienced.
   I know this seems to you to be uncharitable to the people at home. And yet I tell you that Pa himself sometimes vaguely felt that he had chosen the wrong side. But he tried to espouse irreconcilable things at the same time and — — — wasn’t as firm of character as he appeared and as I thought he was in my young days, and even later still. Anyway. As to the Tassaert exhibition18 — if ever anyone was wronged, it was he. Taking the opportunity to mention another — I don’t wait for exhibitions to form my opinion about painters — they’ll have to recognize Chaplin too. As to Tassaert’s colour, he’s a harmonist and his work, painted in more or less one tone, is good because of the modelling, because of the fine sense of the female forms that he had, because of something impassioned in the expressions — and I think he belongs to the family of the Greuzes and Prud’hons — better, more modern, more sound in his sentiment than Greuze. Chaplin is more of a colourist than he is. And I do think it’s rather a pity that Tassaert, who painted so wonderfully boldly, didn’t sometimes seek for more glow and life in the colour. But he’s certainly better than Scheffer and Delaroche and Dubufe and Gérôme, who are so little painters. What a dreadful pity it is that a fellow like Gérôme, who painted The prisoner and who painted The Russian camp and The Syrian shepherd, has so much that is cold and sterile in him. People will also recognize Isabey; Ziem too. Those two are very much painters and that, after all, is what it comes down to in painting. They wrote to me from home at New Year and I also sent a postcard. But writing wouldn’t work, while I moreover believe that unconsciously, as a matter of course, they tell everyone everything, so — I wrote — goodbye for now — after all I’ll probably see them in the spring for some time. I must close. What the coloration in a painting is — it’s surely the enthusiasm in life and so — it’s no small matter to seek and preserve it. With a view to getting models, this month I think I’ll go and see Verlat, who’s the director of the academy here21 — and I’ll see what the rules are and to what extent one could work from a nude model — I’ll take a portrait and some drawings with me when I go. 
   I have an immense desire to improve my knowledge of the nude. I’ve seen a large bronze group by Lambeaux — two figures — a man embracing a woman — superb, something like Paul Dubois, say, or anyway the first-rate fellows. It’s been purchased for the museum. I often envy sculptors. But it’s much the same everywhere; I have to earn a little more in order to be able to broaden out. I also just want to tell you that, given my desire to study the figure — if I weren’t to manage it here — I might perhaps go further afield rather than go back to Holland before I’ve worked in a studio for a while. And that further afield — might possibly be Paris, without hesitation. You may be of the opinion that I’m an impossible character, but — that’s absolutely your business. I, for instance, don’t have to worry about it and I won’t worry about it. I know that from time to time you think better and differently, but I know that habit always makes you lapse back into that same mistake in regard to me. What I seek is so straightforward that in the end you’ll have to admit it. So let’s say in conclusion — the sooner the better. Regards and with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent As regards the end of the month — I ask you most kindly but absolutely — let one of your creditors at least do without 50 francs (they can stand it, rest assured) but please not me, because EVEN THEN it will still be tough for me. My dear Theo, Last Sunday I saw the two large paintings by Rubens for the first time, and because I’d looked at the ones in the museum repeatedly and at my leisure, these — The descent from the Cross and The elevation of the Cross — were all the more interesting for it. There’s an oddity in The elevation of the Cross that struck me right away, and that is — there are no female figures in it. Unless on the side panels of the triptych. It’s no better for it in consequence. Let me tell you that I adore The descent from the Cross. Not, though, because of the depth of emotion that one would find in a Rembrandt or in a painting by Delacroix or in a drawing by Millet. Nothing moves me less than Rubens when it comes to the expression of human sorrow. Let me start by saying, to make it clearer what I mean — that even his most beautiful heads of a weeping Magdalen or Mater Dolorosas always just remind me of the tears of a pretty tart who’s caught the clap, say, or some such petty vexation of human life3 — as such they’re masterly, but one needn’t look for anything more in them. Rubens excels in the painting of ordinary beautiful women. But he is not dramatic in the expression. Compare him with, say, the head by Rembrandt in the La Caze Collection4 — with the male figure in the Jewish bride5 — you’ll understand what I mean — that, for instance, his 8 or so bombastic fellows performing a feat of strength with a heavy wooden cross in The elevation of the Cross seem absurd to me as soon as I look at them from the standpoint of modern analysis of human passions and emotions. That in his expressions, particularly in the men (always excepting actual portraits) Rubens is superficial, hollow, bombastic, yes, altogether conventional and nothing, like — Giulio Romano and even worse fellows of the decadence. But all the same, I adore it because it is precisely he, Rubens, who seeks to express a mood of gaiety, of serenity, of sorrow, and actually achieves it, through the combination of colours — even if his figures are sometimes hollow etc. Thus in The elevation of the Cross, even — the pale spot — the body a high, light accent — is dramatic in the context of its contrast with the rest, which has been pitched so low. The same thing, but to my mind far more beautiful, is the charm of The descent from the Cross, where the pale spot is repeated by the blonde hair, pale faces and necks of the female figures, while the sombre setting is immensely rich because of those various low masses, brought together by the tone, of red, dark green, black, grey, violet. And Delacroix tried again to get people to believe in the symphonies of the colours. And in vain, one would say, judging by how much almost everyone understands good colour to mean the correctness of local colour, the small-minded preciseness — that neither Rembrandt, nor Millet, nor Delacroix, nor whomever you like, not even Manet or Courbet, set as their aim, any more than Rubens or Veronese did.
         I’ve also seen various other Rubens paintings &c. in several churches. And it’s very interesting to study Rubens, precisely because he is, or rather seems, so supremely simple in his technique. Does it with so little, and paints — and above all draws, too — with such a swift hand and without any hesitation. But portraits and — heads or figures of women, that’s his forte. There he’s deep and intimate, too. And how fresh his paintings have remained precisely because of the simplicity of the technique. Now what else shall I tell you? That I feel increasingly inclined, without rushing, that’s to say without rushing nervously — to do all my figure studies over again from the beginning very calmly and coolly. I’d like to get to the point in knowledge of the nude and the structure of the figure where I can work from memory. I’d like to work either with Verlat or at another studio for a while, and for the rest also paint from models for myself as much as possible. At the moment I’ve left 5 paintings — 2 portraits, 2 landscapes, 1 still life — with Verlat’s painting class at the academy. I’ve just been there again, but each time I haven’t found him there. But I’ll soon be able to let you know how that turns out. And I hope to arrange it so that I can paint from the model at the academy all day, which would make it easier for me, since the models are so awfully expensive that I can’t keep it up. And I must find some way of getting help in that regard. In any event, I think that I’ll stay in Antwerp itself for a while, instead of going back to the country. It would be so much better than postponing it, and there’s so much more opportunity here of finding people who might take an interest in it. I feel that I dare do something and can do something, and things have already been dragging on for far too long. You get cross if I make a comment, or rather you take no notice of it, and all the rest that we know, and yet I believe that there will come a time when you yourself will have to acknowledge that you’ve been too weak in seeing to it that I get back some of my credit with people. But anyway, we’re facing the future, not the past. And again — I believe that time will bring you to the realization that, if there had been more cordiality and warmth between us, we could have set up our own business together.
   Even if you’d stayed with G&C. You said to me, indeed, that you know very well that you’ll get no thanks for your pains — but are you so very sure that this isn’t a misunderstanding like the one Pa himself laboured under? At any rate I won’t put up with it, you can be sure of that. For there’s still too much to do, even nowadays. The other day I saw an excerpt from Zola’s new book for the first time, ‘L’oeuvre’, which as you know is appearing as a serial in Gil Blas. I think that this novel will do some good if it sinks in a little in the art world. I thought the excerpt that I read was very realistic. For my part I’ll admit that something else is needed when working absolutely from nature — facility of composition — knowledge of the figure — but after all — I don’t think I’ve been putting myself to all this trouble for years for absolutely nothing. I feel a certain power in me because, wherever I may go, I’ll always have a goal — painting people as I see and know them. As to whether we’ve already heard the last of Impressionism — to stick to the term Impressionism — I always imagine that many newcomers may still emerge in figure painting, in particular, and I’m beginning to think it increasingly desirable in a difficult time like the present that one should seek one’s salvation precisely by going deeper into high art. For there is relatively higher and lower — people are more than the rest, and for that matter a whole lot harder to paint, too. I’ll do my best to make acquaintances here, and I thought that if I worked for a while with Verlat, say, I’d be in a better position to know what’s going on here, and what there is to do, and how one can get into it. So just let me scratch around, and for heaven’s sake don’t lose heart or weaken. I don’t think that you can reasonably ask me to go back to the country for the sake of perhaps 50 francs a month less, when the whole stretch of years ahead is so closely related to the associations I have to establish in town, either here in Antwerp or later in Paris. And I wish I could make you understand how easy it is to foresee that a great deal will change in the trade. And consequently there are many new opportunities too, if one could come up with something original. But that that is therefore necessary, if one wants to do something useful. It’s no fault of mine and no crime when I tell you we must put more force into this or that, and if we don’t have it ourselves we’ll have to find friends and new contacts. I have to earn a bit more or have a few more friends — preferably both. That’s the way to get there, but it’s been too tough for me recently.
   As regards this month, I really do definitely have to insist that you manage to send me at least another 50 francs. At the moment I’m losing weight, and moreover my clothes are getting too bad &c. You know very well yourself that this won’t do. All the same, I have a degree of confidence that we can pull through. But you said that if I became ill we’d be in even more of a state — I hope it won’t come to that, but I would like to be a little bit more comfortable, precisely so as to prevent that. Anyway — when one thinks how many people just go on living without ever in their lives having even a notion of care — and who always just think that everything will turn out for the best. As if people didn’t starve — and no one ever perished. I’m beginning to object more and more to your imagining yourself to be a financier and, for instance, thinking the exact opposite of me. People aren’t all alike, and if one isn’t able to see that in calculating, above all, time must have passed over the calculation before one can consider for certain that one has calculated correctly; if one can’t see this, one is no calculator. And a broader view of finance is precisely what characterizes many modern financiers. That’s to say not exploiting, but allowing freedom of action. I know, Theo, how you yourself could perhaps be rather hard pressed. But you’ve never in your life had it as hard as I have for the last 10 or 12 years in a row. Can’t you understand that I’m right when I say that now, perhaps, it’s been long enough; in that time I’ve learned something I couldn’t do before, so all the opportunities have been renewed and I come up against it, against always being neglected? And if it were now to be my wish to stay here again in city life for a while, then perhaps also go to a studio in Paris, will you try to prevent it? Be fair enough to let me go on, because I tell you, I’m not looking for a row and I don’t want a row, but I won’t allow my career to be blocked. And what can I do in the country, unless I go there with money for models and paint? There’s no opportunity in the country, absolutely none, to make money from my work, and that opportunity does exist in town. So I won’t be secure until I’ve made friends in the city, and that’s the order of the day. Now for the moment it might make things a bit more difficult but it’s the way, all the same, and going back to the country now would end in stagnation. Anyway — regards — De Goncourt’s book is good. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Wanted to tell you that Verlat has seen my work at last, and when he saw the two landscapes and the still life that I brought with me from the country, he said — ‘yes, but that doesn’t concern me’ — when I showed him the two portraits, he said — that’s different, if it’s the figure you can come. So I’m going to begin tomorrow by starting work in the painting class at the academy. While I’ve moreover arranged with Vinck (a pupil of Leys’s by whom I saw things in the manner of Leys, medieval) to draw some plaster casts in the evening. I don’t think I can go wrong with either of these two things — and I can probably learn something there that could be useful to me, be it for painting, be it for drawing. And in any event it’s an attempt to get to know people. I saw in passing that there are several people of my age working in the painting class and in the drawing class. And certainly if I were to become a little friendly with Verlat or Vinck or whomever, it would save me money for models. Anyway — that’s mainly the practical side of the matter. 
   I also have to go to two people with a view to portraits; I don’t know if anything will come of it. One is a matter of making two portraits of a couple of very pretty girls — types with very dark eyes, dark hair — two sisters who, I imagine, are being kept. And the other is a portrait of a married woman. But I tell you, nothing is settled yet and it could fall through. I do know, though, that if need be I’d be prepared to do them for nothing, just so that I can practise. But, when you think that I’ll have to go and work either there or elsewhere at someone’s home etc., I’ll have to do something about my clothes, because I’ve been wearing mine for two years and they’ve suffered, particularly recently. If it were just a 40-franc suit, say, it would be good enough.  And if Verlat says that I have to purchase some painting gear or other, I also have to be prepared to do that too. 
   Accordingly. Try, as I asked you, to send 50 francs, then I can get by till the end of the month and would buy myself a new pair of trousers and waistcoat at once, and the jacket in February. It’s dreadfully cold here, and I often feel far from well, but anyway, as long as the painting’s going, that doesn’t really matter. I’ve already drawn there 2 evenings, and I have to say that that I think it’s very good to draw plaster casts, particularly for doing peasant figures, for instance, but not, please, as it’s usually done! I actually find all the drawings I see there hopelessly bad — and fundamentally wrong. And I know that mine are totally different — time will just have to tell who’s right. Damn it, not one of them has any feeling for what a classical statue is. I, who haven’t seen a good cast of a classical piece for years — and the ones they have here are very fine — and who have always had live models in front of me in those years — I’m astounded by 
   the ancients’ immense knowledge and aptness of sentiment now that I really see it again. Anyway. All the same, it’s to be expected that the academic gentlemen will accuse me of heresy, but — so be it. I’d like to make some progress with Verlat if I could. I find much of what he does both hard and wrong in colour, and — paint — but I know that he also has his good days. That, for instance, he paints a better portrait than most of the others. And so we’ll see. I continue to feel cheerful in spite of everything, precisely because it does me good to be in all sorts of circumstances so unlike the country, and it could well be that I found myself at home here. Anyway. But do your best to write to me soon, and it’s really necessary that I have that extra 50 francs for the month. I won’t manage otherwise, and things are too urgent. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve been painting there for a few days now and it suits me very well. Above all because there are all sorts of painters there, and I see them working in very diverse ways — something I’ve never had — often seeing other people at work. It’s by far the best for me to stay there for a long time — for the models there are good and it’ll work out better that way. I say again what I’ve already said to you before, you’ve formed a false impression about the expenses of painting and the models, and it’s much harder than you evidently realize, particularly when one works alone. But we’ll hope that this way there might be some improvement. We’re getting new models on Monday — that’s when I actually start properly. Now I ought to have had a large canvas1 by Monday — I’ve also been explicitly told that I have to have other brushes &c. besides what I have. But I’ve no money left. So it’s really pressing, and so I do wish that you’d do what you could, for I’m also doing what I can, and it’s constantly the case that there’s hardly anything left for food.
   In the evenings I go and draw there, too — but I think that the fellows in the drawing class all work badly and in completely the wrong way. The painting class is better, and as I believe I already told you there are all sorts of people of all ages, at least 5 or so even older than me. At the moment I’m working on a head of a child. It would be a great help to me if I could have your letter by Monday. What I wrote to you about clothes I need is also rather urgent. So far I’ve already made a few acquaintances there, who had seen the things that I’d taken in in order to be admitted. There are devilish good ones among the studies by past students that are hanging there. There are things by Neuhuys and Huibers, among others. But perhaps the best one is by an American, I don’t know the name, though7 — a nude study of an old man, one would say like a Fortuny or Regnault.
     I don’t think that I can take a shorter route to progress, and whether I go to the country later or come to a studio in Paris, in any event it’s good for me to see a lot of painting and above all keep working regularly from models, as much as is in any way possible. Regards — I’m writing to you in haste because I have to go out again. But still do your utmost best not to keep me waiting, for the work depends on it, and I assure you that it’ll be hard enough for me in any event. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve already left it too long to confirm the safe receipt of your letter and the enclosure. As regards your letter, it’s still the same and, to my mind, when you judge me you rely too much on generalities and on prejudices that are too superficial and too wrong for me to be able to believe that you’ll always stick to them. And for this very reason, I believe that in any event it can do no harm if we see each other again in Paris after a while. I’ve been dreadfully busy this week because, as well as the painting class, I also go drawing in the evenings, and then after that go on and work from a model at a club from half past 9 to half past 11. For I’ve become a member of no fewer than two of these clubs. And I now know two fellows who to my mind draw well, both Dutch. This week I painted a large thing with two nude torsos — two wrestlers, a pose set by Verlat. And I really like doing that. And the same is true of drawing from the antique — I’ve now finished two large figures. At any rate it has two things in its favour — firstly that it interests me greatly, after having drawn clothed models for years, to see the nude and the antique again and to verify things. Further, just to be admitted anywhere in Paris one has to have been somewhere else and have lost one’s rough edges, and one always has to contend with fellows who’ve already worked at an academy for some length of time. What Verlat tells me is very severe and so too is what Vinck, who takes the drawing class, tells me — and they strongly advise me above all to draw, if necessary do nothing else but draw from the antique and nudes for at least a year, and that this would be the shortest way, that then I’ll return very differently to my other work outdoors or my portraits. And I think it’s true — so I have to see to it that I’m somewhere where I have access to both the antique and nude models at first. The best one in the class has done it like this too, and he says that he felt himself progressing a little with each study, and I’ve been able to see that for myself in things he did before and his recent things.
   I think you’ll remember: The Greeks don’t start from the outline, they start from the centres, from the cores. Géricault took that from Gros, who took it from the Greeks, but Géricault himself wished to take it from the Greeks, too, and he studied them for that very thing — afterwards Delacroix did the same as Géricault. This question — Millet draws like that too — more than anyone else — is perhaps the root of all figure painting — is extremely closely related to modelling by drawing directly with a brush — conceived totally differently from Bouguereau and others, who lack interior modelling, are flat compared with Géricault and Delacroix, and who don’t go beyond the paint. In which latter, Géricault &c., the figures have backs, even when one sees them from the front, air around the figures — beyond the paint. It’s to search for this — which I wouldn’t want even to talk about with Verlat or with Vinck — that I’m working; there’s no risk that they could show it to me, because the fault with both of them is in the colour which, as you know, isn’t true with either of them.  It’s strange that when I compare my study with those of other people, it has almost nothing in common with them. Theirs have more or less the same colour as the flesh — and so look very accurate from close to — but if one steps back a bit, it becomes painful and flat to look at — all that pink and delicate yellow etc., etc., soft in itself, produces a hard effect. The way I do it, from close to it’s greenish red, yellow-grey, white, black and a lot of neutral, and mostly colours one can’t put a name to. But if one steps back a little it’s indeed beyond the paint — and then there’s air around it and a restrained undulating light falls on it. At the same time, the least little lick of colour with which one might glaze it is telling.
   But what’s lacking in it is — practice — I must paint 50 or so like that — I believe that I’ll have something then. I make the business of putting on the paint too difficult because I haven’t yet sufficiently got into the way of it, have to search too long, work it to death. But this is a question of keeping on painting for a while, so that the touch is effective straightaway as one gets it more fixed in one’s mind. There are some fellows who’ve seen my drawings — after seeing my peasant figures6 one of them immediately started drawing the model in the life class with more vigorous modelling, putting the shadows in strongly. He showed me the drawing and we talked about it. It was full of life and it was the finest drawing that I’ve seen by any of the fellows here. Now do you know what they think about it? The teacher, Siberdt, purposely sent for him and said that if he dared to do it again in that manner it would be considered that he was making a fool of the teacher. And I tell you, it was the only drawing that was generously done, like Tassaert or Gavarni. So you see how it is. But it’s not bad, though, and one mustn’t get angry about it, and must keep quiet just as if one would really like to break oneself of it, that bad manner, but unfortunately keeps slipping back into it. The figures that they draw — are virtually always top-heavy and topple forwards, headlong — there’s not one that stands on its feet. And this standing, this really must already be there in the initial design. Anyway — I’m still really pleased that I came here — however it goes and however it turns out — whether or not I get along with Verlat. 
       I find the friction of ideas that I’m looking for here — I’m getting a fresh eye for my own work, can judge better where the weak points are and thus make progress in order to correct them. What I ask you very earnestly for the sake of things working out well, is not to lose your patience, nor above all your optimism, for we’d be cutting our own throats if our courage were to fail us precisely as the moment presents itself when we could acquire a degree of influence if we show that we know what we want, and dare to do something and manage to see it through. And as to the money — if I worked in a studio and so saved a good part of the cost of models, even then 150 francs still wouldn’t be much, because painting is very expensive — but it can be done, provided one economizes even on food &c. If models have to come out of it, then it definitely can’t be done on 150 francs, and one wastes time &c. So at the same time it’s cheapest to stay in a studio — because for more finished nude studies, above all, it’s not possible to pay the cost of the model oneself. I don’t consider it impossible that in due course, especially if some of the other fellows couldn’t help starting to put in more powerful shadows, that Verlat or someone else will seek a row with me, even if I systematically avoid it. Which I’ll do systematically because it’s to my advantage to stay here for a bit. Anyway — I’m curious as to what will happen with your apartment. As to me, though, if I come I’ll be perfectly content to take a cheap little room or a garret in a hotel somewhere in an out-of-the-way quarter (Montmartre). But that’s pretty much by the way and we’re not there yet. Let’s stay here for a while first — and then, all in good time. The winter course ends on 31 March. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Of course all my attention is concentrated on gaining what I want to gain. Namely a clear field to make a career. Namely to find my feet instead of going under. I’ve already told you that my constitution is at a very low ebb, and that I must act energetically to put it right. I’ve already told you that there’s no reason to go and work in the country again for the first year — that it’s infinitely better for the whole future if I draw plaster casts and nudes in town. Now I furthermore believe I’m not misstating the case when I dare assert that your own situation is also more or less critical — critical enough, at any rate, to make it advisable to seek renewal. For the longer I’m in town the more I become convinced that the business crisis is not at an end, that the trade in paintings, above all, is being terribly threatened and has already been affected. And to express the criticism briefly — the big houses that became the focus of the art trade and reached their greatest growth and expansion in, let’s say, 68/70 - 76 — that have maintained their prestige since then only with difficulty and by bullying — will they be able to hold out or not? As they’re being weakened in the second place by the force majeure of the general crisis, but in the first place by wrong organization internally and by the fact that painters increasingly prefer personal initiative and are circumventing the dealers and managing their own affairs — and even doing harm to the big houses where they can. 
   So there, perhaps, you have the question — can one rely on the present situation or not? Must one be on the qui vive for a general decline and various crashes in prices and in consequence a possible stagnation of the routine trading of recent years, or not? However, I’m not asking you to have a cast-iron opinion about it — I don’t have one myself either. One can predict nothing infallibly in so large a field. So better leave that aside. But, if one analyzes from close up, one sees that the greatest and most energetic people of the century have always worked against the grain, and with them working was always through personal initiative. Both in painting and in literature (I don’t know about music, but I imagine that it will have been the same thing there). Starting something on a small scale, persevering come what may, producing a great deal with a little capital, having character rather than money, more audacity than credit. Look at Millet and Sensier, look at Balzac, Zola, De Goncourt. Look at Delacroix. 
       All the same — setting up a studio in Paris now, straightaway, might perhaps not be as good as not doing it until after another year of study, both for yourself and for me. Let me draw with Cormon for a year. During that period, you take another really good look at the business, and the opportunities. And then — I believe — we can chance it. Given that in a time of monetary crisis like the present, money is what ammunition is to a soldier in a hostile country — let’s not waste our powder. Furthermore — I hear various people complaining, both painters and — ordinary people: ‘I took a fine room because people were going to come to me, and no one’s come to me since, and I don’t feel at home there myself.’ Still, I do believe that for portraits it’s necessary to create a degree of comfort in a studio, otherwise the people who come to sit will dislike it. But if one wants to start on that, one must think about where one rents it, where one has the best chance of getting visitors and making friends and becoming known. Given the desirability, above all, of drawing for another year — the question of a good studio is very much a side issue for the time being, and so anything will do. If we’re prepared to look at it coolly and sensibly, I don’t think this year of drawing is a misfortune. On the contrary, it gives us time to work everything out and consider things at our leisure before we begin. 
   So the wisest thing would be if I were to come to Paris and we were to put it off for a year — in that year we can get to know each other better at close quarters  which can change a lot — and then we can be less afraid to start expanding a little, because in the meantime we’ll have strengthened the weak points. If we work for another year, if we recover our health — you as well as me — we’ll be more resilient then than now. But what should I do now? Look here, to go back to Brabant is actually a detour, and I’ll lose time and money on it. Why can’t I go straight from here to Paris whenever you like, and carry on working here until I go? I tell you, I’m in such a bad way that if there’s any money, then let me take care of my health and let the rest go, because they can do just as well at home with a labourer, in fact better. If I don’t get a bit stronger, you see, it’s CERTAIN that I’ll be ill — I wouldn’t be able to do anything about it, and for that matter I don’t much care either, whatever will be, will be. 
   If I go to Brabant I’ll have the expenses of my journey, I’ll also have to pay for my room there (which I gave notice on)4 and take somewhere else to store my things, which will be not less than 50 francs rent and another 50 francs in advance for a new store and removals. I’d also be obliged to pay for some paint — and of course I’d begin to paint again there too. Now I thought that because of the force majeure of circumstances I was free to declare myself unable to meet these obligations at present. In other words not to pay my rent there but to say, put my furniture in your attic, keep it as security, I’ll pay you when I come to collect it, then at the same time I don’t have to rent new storage. If I have the weakness of always just giving, even if I can’t afford it, very well — but then I do myself too much harm and I make myself unfit for my work. 
   I think you must appreciate this. When you consider how I’d already been complaining recently that it couldn’t go on like this, you see it really wasn’t for nothing. If I’d known beforehand what I’ve found out here about opportunities to work in a studio in town, I’d have done it sooner. Now — since I must make progress and since I’m also ill — all I can do is ask you to approve my staying here until I go to Paris, and let me go to Paris at any rate not later than when the course here ends, 31 March. Even then, we still inevitably have the cost of travelling from here to Paris. You have to move, too, which also won’t happen by itself. So Brabant is a detour, waste of time etc. 
   As things are now I have to live from one day to the next, and what’s owing has to wait. Once I’m better and I start to sell in Paris, very well, then I can pay off the rent and the paint. Not now. I haven’t got it and neither have you, so that’s that. Anyway, I’ve had so much unpleasantness there that I don’t have to consider anyone there. It would also be a weakness on your part if you were to alter that. You constantly write and tell me that you haven’t any money, very well, so that’s so. If making money is not possible when it comes to food — then it ought not to be possible when it comes to rent or unnecessary travelling expenses. And at home — I know perfectly well that Rijken, the gardener, or Huizing, and not I, are the best people to pack things up and send them off properly. If I were there I would do it; travelling there expressly — no — not when there are at least 6 pairs of hands at least as good as mine at their disposal. 
   In the end, it doesn’t bother me, but I just tell you what’s right and I point out to you the urgency of going on with what will enable us to make progress. It’s not pleasant for me to come back ill either — you see — and you can’t deny that. Let me recover first, I’m at much too low an ebb now. Anyway, the summary of this and the last letter is this — Carry on calmly either here or much better yet with Cormon. Moreover, I’m ill, although I’m keeping going. If I possibly could I wouldn’t object to going back to Brabant even, I’d be happy to do it if I could, but neither you nor I have the means and — they can better spare me there than use me. Regards, write to me soon though. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and the enclosure. The fact that you yourself now actually propose the plan of going to Cormon is something that gives me immense pleasure. Let me tell you how things have been going for me here. The painting course ended last week, because before the end of the course there’s a competition for people who’ve been through the course; so I’m not one of them. So now I’m drawing during the day, too, and the teacher there — who presently makes portraits and gets well paid for them — has repeatedly asked me whether I’d never drawn plaster casts before and whether I’d taught myself to draw. And concluded — I see that you’ve done a great deal of work — and, you won’t be long in making progress, you’ll benefit greatly — it will take a year, but what does that matter? Well, there’s someone my age sitting next to me to whom he doesn’t say that — and he’s also been painting for a long time — he’s been drawing plaster casts for 3 years. Well as a rule they draw without a background there, and for the gentleman in question, in particular, it’s absolutely forbidden. This produces horribly dry drawings. Then Siberdt, that’s the name of the teacher — who also takes the life class — said, as for you, you will draw as you please, since I see that you take drawing seriously; as for the others, in general I don’t allow them to make a background because then they skimp on drawing the forms, while on a white background they’re really forced to do them — so it’s a straitjacket. Then he also said that Verlat had told him that there were good things in my work, which Verlat didn’t tell me. 
   It was just after I got your letter that Siberdt came to look over the drawings — (mine was a head of Niobe and a hand that could be by Michelangelo — I’d done the hand in a couple of hours and he particularly liked that one). Well I told him that I was thinking of going to Cormon — then he said — you will do as you would wish but I tell you that Verlat has trained many able pupils, and we make a point of training those who will do us credit — and I urge you very strongly to stay. Well this is almost a handsome promise that they guarantee success, so what should I do? On the other hand, I’ve also become better acquainted with the English fellows who’ve been in Paris — and heard about their experiences. One has been with Gérôme, one with Cabanel5 &c. They say that one is relatively freer in Paris and, for instance, that one can decide for oneself what one wants to do, more than here, but that the correction is indifferent. Do you know what I think? This — I’d certainly work more in Paris than here — for instance a drawing in a day or every two days. And we know, or rather you know, enough good fellows who won’t refuse to look at them and will even give us tips. So in any event we’re actually on track, whether I stayed here for a while longer or came to you. 
   Anyway, Cormon would very probably say the same as Verlat. For precisely because I’m now in a position to talk to different people about my drawings, I see my own mistakes. That’s a great help in overcoming them. Good spirits, in any event. But now you must write more for once, and we have to see that we manage it intelligently. I heard that Cormon gets people to work for 4 hours in the morning — then in the evening they can go and work at the Louvre or at L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts or at another studio where drawing is done. As to the portraits, there certainly won’t be much time for them if I want to keep up with everything regularly. And it’s the same here, too. However, it’s become dreadfully apparent to me that there are other things that I absolutely definitely have to change. When I compare myself with the other fellows, there’s something much too stiff about me, as if I’d been in prison for 10 years. And that’s a matter whose cause lies in the fact that for 10 years or so I’ve had a both difficult and turbulent time, and worry and sorrow and no friends. That will change, though, as my work gets better and one can do something and knows something. Which, I say, we’re on track to establishing really solidly. 
    Be in no doubt, though — the way to succeed is — to keep courage and patience, and to carry on working hard. And it’s important for me to smarten up my appearance a bit. Perhaps you’ll say that it has nothing to do with art — and — perhaps you’ll agree with me. I’m seeing about getting my teeth put right again. I have no fewer than 10 teeth that I’ve either lost or am losing. And that’s too many and too disagreeable, and besides it makes me look as though I’m over 40, which puts me at too much of a disadvantage. So I’ve decided to have them seen to. It’s a business that will cost me 100 francs, but it can be done now while I’m drawing more easily than at any other time — and I’ve had the bad teeth cut down, and just paid about half in advance. I was told at the same time that I ought to look after my stomach, because it’s not right. It’s certainly not got any better since I’ve been here. But it’s something if one knows where the problem lies, and a great deal can be done about it with a little energy. It’s not pleasant, but what must be must be, and one must see that one stays alive and see one saves some strength if one wants to make paintings. I thought that my teeth were bad for another reason, and I didn’t know that my stomach had deteriorated to such an extent. You may say this is stupid, but one sometimes has to choose between two evils and is stuck on one side or on the other. 
   It was the last month that I’ve had a lot of trouble with it — I also started to cough all the time, bring up phlegm &c., so that I became worried. But we’ll put it right. You understand that I’m no better than the next man in so far as if I let things go too much and too far, just like so many other painters (so many if one looks into it) — I would drop dead or, worse still, become mad or slow-witted. This is simply the way it is, and the point is to steer clear of them, clear of the various rocks — and still manage to keep the ship afloat, even if one does sustain damage. I know that Delacroix said that he had discovered painting when he had neither teeth nor breath left. But I also know that he took care of himself from that moment on. And that without his mistress he would have died 10 years earlier, if not more. So please don’t take this expenditure too much amiss of me; I’ll see that I economize, but it got too bad and I had to do something about it. As to what you write about what’s happening at home, I’ll do whatever you think best in that regard. If need be, I can leave here whenever I like. Let’s say at the beginning of March. But — let’s consider whether or not any help they might get from me would be worth the journey there and back. Because I’m also happy to stay here without going back, and 
   then go from here to Cormon whenever you like. The journey isn’t all that cheap when I work out that the luggage would cost me more than my own fare. So let’s write about this again. I’m still pleased that I came here, otherwise I’d have become stuck, and now, although I see there are still many obstacles, I’ve nonetheless got light by which to make progress. And by adding on a stay in Paris or extending it here, we’ll be on surer ground. As to the plan that we should perhaps live together and take a relatively good studio where we could receive people if need be, keep thinking about it, and let me think about it again too. I see drawing first and foremost that year, which I’m afraid there’s no going back on. If you find a good place and it’s not expensive then it can do no harm, but if it’s expensive it might perhaps not be the cheapest way for the first year if we were to be very hard up for money. The year drawing is the critical point, after that we’ll be freer for many things, both for portraits and for paintings. 
   I think we ought to put this first. For it can’t be helped — didn’t Delacroix and Corot and Millet — particularly later — all keep thinking about the classics and go on studying them? The fellows who study them to scramble through them are, of course, completely wide of the mark. The classics certainly require a great deal of serenity, require that one already knows nature, require tenderness and patience. Otherwise they’re of no use to one.  And it’s very strange indeed that Géricault and Delacroix both knew them more intimately than David, say, they — who were the most radical opponents of all academic routine. I’m not familiar with Turgenev’s books yet, but some time ago I read T.’s biography, which I found very interesting, and how he and Daudet had in common a passion for doing everything from models, summarizing 5 or 6 models in a type. I’m not familiar with Ohnet either, which ought to be interesting from what I hear. More and more, though, I imagine that in the end art for art’s sake — working for the sake of working — energy for energy’s sake — really becomes very important to all the good fellows, for one sees in the De Goncourts — 
       that obstinacy is necessary, for society won’t give you any thanks. But in painting one finds a degree of rest in the stories of those painters, especially those who strove for something high all the same — Israëls himself, for instance, he was still unknown and still poor to the point of eating dry bread — when he still wanted to go to Paris nonetheless, even though the circumstances were discouraging enough. Not to give up, even if one feels one is half dying and even if one feels that in material things one can say goodbye to pleasure in life. Anyway. I wish you’d write more, now we’re discussing this change. Setting up a studio together may perhaps be very good14 — but we have to be able to stick it out and — we really have to know what we’re doing and what we want, and once we set it up a degree of self-confidence is needed, left, after all, after whole series of lost illusions. And one must set up a studio like this — knowing that it’s a battle and that most people are utterly indifferent — so one has to set it up — feeling one has a degree of power, and — so as to be something in one’s time, to be active — to be able to think when one is dying, I am going where the people who dared went. Anyway, we’ll see. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent This impression of myself that I can’t help getting when I compare me with other people — that beside them I look as though I’ve spent 10 years in prison — is not exaggerated — only, to change it, and it will change, I mustn’t stray too far out of the art world again for the present, but will have to carry on for the time being by remaining at a studio or academy. And then it will disappear.  My dear Theo, I already wrote to you the day before yesterday that on the one hand I was far from well, but that on the other hand I nevertheless thought I could see some light. However, I regret that I have to tell you even more categorically that I’m most definitely literally exhausted and overworked. When you think that I went to live in my own studio on 1 May1 — since then it’s perhaps been a matter of 6 or 7 times, so far, that I’ve had my midday meal. For good reasons, I don’t want you to tell Ma that I’m not well — because she might possibly consider that it wasn’t nice that what happened, happened, that’s to say that I didn’t stay there — precisely because of these consequences. I shan’t say anything about it; don’t you say anything either. But I lived then, and since then, here, having nothing for my food because the work cost me too much and I relied too much on the idea that I could stick it out like this. What the doctor tells me is that I absolutely must live better, and that I have to take more care of myself with my work until I’m stronger. It’s total debilitation. Well I’ve made it worse by smoking a lot, which I did all the more because then one isn’t troubled by one’s empty stomach. Anyway, they say — one has to experience lean times, and I’ve had my share of them. Because it’s not just the food, it’s also all the worry and sorrow that one has. You know that for one reason or another the time in Nuenen was far from carefree for me. 
   What’s more — here — I’m very pleased to have come here — but it’s been a difficult time all the same. What we have to do and what is largely lacking — is this. Paying the models ourselves is too much; as long as one doesn’t have enough money, one must take advantage of the opportunities at the studios, like Verlat, like Cormon. And one must be in the artists’ world and work at clubs where one shares the cost of the models. Now it’s true that I didn’t think of this before, or at least didn’t do it — but I wish now that I’d started on it a year earlier. If we could now find some way of living in the same city it would be far and away the best thing, at least for the time being. Only, the more I think about it, the more and more I fancy that it might be better not to spend much on a studio in the first year, because I’ll mostly have to draw in that first year. Because speaking of Cormon — I imagine he would tell me much the same as Verlat says — that I have to draw nudes or plaster casts for up to a year, precisely because I’ve always drawn from life. This isn’t really a harsh requirement, because I tell you that there are people here who’ve been in the class for 3 years and are still not allowed to stop, who also paint. 
   In that year I have to practise the male and the female figure, both in detail and as a whole, and — then I’ll know it by heart, as it were. Drawing in itself, technically, is easy enough for me — I’m beginning to do it the way one writes, with the same ease. But precisely at this level it becomes more interesting, as one is not satisfied with the facility that one gradually acquires but really looks for originality and breadth of conception. Drawing the masses rather than the outlines. Solid modelling. And I can assure you it’s not a bad sign if people like Verlat or Cormon, let’s say, demand that of someone. For there are enough of them that Verlat simply leaves to get on with it because — they just aren’t the fellows for the loftier figure. You talk about the clever fellows at Cormon’s studio. Precisely because I damned well want to be one of them, I’m setting myself in advance, out of my own conviction, the requirement of spending at least a year in Paris mainly drawing from the nude and plaster casts. For the rest, let’s do whatsoever our hand finds to do5 in the way of painting, if an effect out of doors strikes us or we happen to have a good model &c. And don’t think that this is the long way, because it’s the short one. Someone who can draw his figures from memory is much more productive than someone who can’t. And by my taking the trouble to spend that year drawing — you’ll just see how productive we become. 
   And don’t think either that the years I worked out of doors were wasted. For it’s the very thing that people who’ve never been anywhere else but at academies and studios lack, that view of reality in which they live, and finding subjects. Anyway. Might it not be wise if we put off renting a studio at least for the first six months, precisely because it all comes down to the money? But otherwise I like the idea of setting up a studio a great deal, a very great deal. Even, if need be, such that one could combine with other painters to take models together. The more energy the better. And in hard times6 — one must especially seek a way out in friendship and collaboration. But Theo, it’s so rotten about this indisposition — I’m dreadfully sorry — but I’m still in good spirits. It will get better. You understand that it would have got worse and worse if I’d delayed doing something about it. What I think, though, is this — one mustn’t think that people whose constitution is damaged, wholly or half, aren’t fit for painting. It’s desirable for one to make it to 60 at least, and necessary for one to make it to 50, if one begins when one is around 30. But one absolutely doesn’t have to be perfectly healthy; one may have all sorts of things wrong. The work doesn’t always suffer as a result — on the contrary, nervous fellows are more sensitive and more refined. But Theo, precisely because it has proved in my case that my health leaves something to be desired — I’ve decided to concentrate specifically on the loftier figure and to try to refine myself. 
    It really struck me so unexpectedly — I did feel weak and feverish, but I still kept going. Only it began to worry me that teeth were breaking off one after another. And that I was starting to look worse and worse. Anyway, we’ll see about putting it right. I think that getting the teeth attended to will help in itself because, as my mouth was usually painful, I just swallowed my food as quickly as possible. And perhaps it will also help my appearance, at least a little. As regards this month, I’ve paid 25 francs in advance for my room, 30 francs in advance for my food, and 50 francs to the dentist; also a visit to the doctor and some drawing materials — which leaves 6 francs. Now the important issue this month is not to be ill, which isn’t easy to resolve — and which could very well happen. But we’ll see — I still think I’ve got a certain toughness in common with the peasants, who also don’t eat anything very special and still go on living and working. So don’t worry too much about it. If you could send a little bit extra, very well — but if you can’t, I’ll wait calmly to see how it goes. 
   What I don’t like is that I’m feverish, and I reason about it thus: although I may be weakened, I’ve still taken some care not to eat any unwholesome food. Over-exertion isn’t excessive either — because, despite everything, I keep my spirits up all the time — so that it’s because I’m weak that I over-exert myself. It seems to me that it must sort itself out. You understand, though, that if it were to get worse — and took a virulent turn — one might have to contend with typhus or at least typhoid fever. And actually the only reasons why I certainly don’t expect that are these — 1 that I’ve had a great deal of fresh air, and 2 that, as I said, even though I’ve evidently not fed myself well enough, as a precaution I’ve nonetheless made do with very simple food rather than the muck in the cheap restaurants — and 3 — that I have a degree of calm and serenity in the face of things. So we must wait and see. Don’t you worry about it, because not even I do — I maintain that, supposing I do get a fever, I’ve lived and eaten too simply for it to become very virulent all that easily. After all, things don’t happen of their own accord, and there’s a reason for everything. 
   Write to me soon, though, because I really do need it. As regards going to Nuenen too — I want to know what you’d think best. But I’m not needed there — because someone like Rijken, the gardener, for instance, can see to what needs to be packed or sent at least as well as I can. If there’s any point in it, though, I can be ready by March if need be. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent. My dear Theo, I’ve received your letter and 25 francs enclosed and I thank you very much for both. I’m really glad that you like my plan to come to Paris. I believe it will help me make progress and at the same time that, if I didn’t go, I might easily get into a mess, keep moving around in the same circle too much, persist in the same mistakes. Furthermore, as for you, I don’t think that coming home to a studio would do you any harm. For the rest, I have to tell you the same about me as you write about yourself — I’ll disappoint you. And even so, this is the way to combine forces. And even so, much greater understanding of each other can follow from it. Now what shall I tell you about my health? I still believe that I have a chance of avoiding being really ill; all the same, I’ll need time to get better. I also still have two more teeth to be filled, then my upper jaw, which was most affected, will be all right again. I still have to pay 10 francs for that, and then another 40 francs to get the bottom half right too. Some years of those 10 years that I appear to have spent in prison will disappear as a result. Because bad teeth, which one so seldom sees any more as it’s so easy to get them put right, 
   since bad teeth give a physiognomy a sort of sunken look. And then — even eating the same things, one can naturally digest better when one can chew properly, and so my stomach will have a chance to recover. I really do notice that I’ve been at a very low ebb, though — and as you wrote yourself, all sorts of things that are even worse could arise out of neglecting it. However, we’ll see that we get it put right. I haven’t worked for a few days, gone to bed early a couple of nights (otherwise it was usually 1 or 2 o’clock because of drawing at the club). And I feel that it’s calming me. I’ve had a note from Ma, who writes that they’re going to start packing in March. Further, since you say you’ll have to pay rent until the end of June — well then, perhaps it would be best after all if I were to return to Nuenen, starting in March, only — if I encountered opposition and scenes like I got before I left, I would be wasting my time there and so, even if it were only just for those few months, I’d make a change anyhow, since I want to have some new things from the country ready to bring to Paris with me. That Siberdt, the teacher of the antique, who spoke to me at first as I told you, definitely tried to pick a quarrel 
   with me today, perhaps with a view to getting rid of me. Which didn’t work inasmuch as I said — Why are you trying to pick a quarrel with me? I have no wish to quarrel, and in any case I have absolutely no desire to contradict you, but you deliberately try to pick a quarrel with me. He evidently hadn’t expected that and couldn’t say much to refute it this time, but — next time, of course, he’ll be able to start something. The issue behind it is that the fellows in the class are talking about things in my work among themselves, and I’ve said, not to Siberdt but outside the class to some of the fellows, that their drawings were completely wrong. Bear in mind that if I go to Cormon and run into trouble sooner or later either with the master or the pupils, I wouldn’t let it worry me. If need be, even if I didn’t have a master, I could also go through the antique course by going to draw in the Louvre or somewhere. And so I’d do that if I had to — although I’d far rather have correction — as long as it doesn’t become DELIBERATE provocation; that correction without one giving any cause other than a certain singularity in one’s manner of working which is different from the others. If he starts on me again, I’ll say out loud in the class, I’m happy to do mechanically everything that you tell me to do, because I’m determined to pay you back what is your due, if need be, if you insist on it, but — 
   as far as mechanizing me as you mechanize the others is concerned, that has not, I assure you, the slightest hold over me. Besides, you started by telling me something quite different, that’s to say, you told me: tackle it as you wish. The reason why I’m drawing plaster casts — not to start from the outline, but to start from the centres2— I haven’t got it yet, but I feel it more and more and — I’ll certainly carry on with it, it’s too interesting. I wish that we could spend a few days together in the Louvre and could just talk about it. I believe it would interest you. This morning I sent you Chérie, mainly for the preface, which will certainly strike you. And — I wish that at the end of our lives we could also walk somewhere together and — looking back, say — we’ve done this — and that’s one; and that — and that’s two; and that — and that’s three. And if we want to and dare to — will there be anything to talk about then? We can try two things — making something good ourselves — collecting things by other people that we think are good, and dealing in them. 
   But we must both live rather more robustly, and perhaps combining forces is a step towards becoming more robust. But now allow me to touch on a delicate matter — if I’ve said unpleasant things to you, specifically about our upbringing and our home, this has been because we’re in an area where being critical is essential in order for us to get along with and understand each other and cooperate in business. Now I can well understand that one can passionately love something or someone that one can’t do anything about. Very well — I won’t go into that except in so far as it might make a fatal separation between us where reconciliation is needed. And our upbringing &c. — won’t prove to be so good that we’ll retain many illusions about it — there you are — and we might perhaps have been happier with a different upbringing. But if we stick to the positive idea of wanting to produce and to be something, then we’ll be able, without getting angry, to discuss faits accomplis as such when it’s unavoidable and might perhaps touch on or directly concern the Goupils or the family. And for the rest, these issues between us are for the understanding of the situation and not out of rancour. 
   But if we undertake something it won’t be a matter of indifference to either of us to improve our health, because we need time alive — some 25 or 30 years of working constantly. There’s so much of interest in the present age when one thinks how very possible it is that we may well yet see the beginning of the end of a society. And just as there is infinite poetry in the autumn or in a sunset, and then there’s so much soul and mysterious endeavour in nature, so it is now. And as for art — decline, if you will, after the Delacroix, Corots, Millets, Duprés, Troyons, Bretons, Rousseaux, Daubignys — very well — but a decline so full of charm — that there truly is still an immense, immense amount of good things to come, and they’re being made every day. I’m longing dreadfully for the Louvre, Luxembourg etc., where everything will be so new to me. For the rest of my life I’ll regret that I didn’t see the Cent chefs d’oeuvre, the Delacroix exhibition5 and the Meissonier exhibition. But there will still be plenty of opportunities to catch up. It’s true, for instance, that wanting to progress too quickly here, I may actually have progressed less, but what would you? My health is also behind it, and if I regain that as I hope to do, then my taking pains will have been less in vain. 
   After all, I believe that if one asks permission, one may draw plaster casts in the Louvre, even if one isn’t at L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts. It wouldn’t surprise me if, once the idea of living together takes hold, you’ll find it odder and odder that we’ve been together so surprisingly little, if you will — for fully 10 years. Anyway, I most certainly hope that this will be the end of it, and that it won’t begin again. What you say about the apartment is perhaps really rather expensive. I mean, I’d be just as happy if it weren’t quite as good. I’m curious as to how those few months in Nuenen will be for me. Since I have some furniture there, since it’s beautiful there, too, and I know the district a little, it might be a good thing for me to keep a pied-à-terre there, if need be in an inn where I could leave that furniture, since otherwise it will be lost — and it could still come in very useful. There’s sometimes the most to do by returning to old places. 
   I must finish this now, since I’m going to the club. Keep thinking about what we can best do. Regards. Yours truly, Vincent. My dear Theo, I have to write to you one more time because the sooner we can take an outright decision the better. As regards a studio — if we could find, in one and the same house, a room with an alcove and also a garret or a corner attic — then you could have that apartment of room and alcove, and we could make it just as comfortable as possible. And during the day the room could serve as studio, and the garret could serve for various more unsightly tools or for dirty work, and I could also sleep there — and you in the studio alcove. It seems to me that such an arrangement or something similar would be perfectly satisfactory for the first year. What I’m not sure about is whether we’ll get on personally, although I don’t despair of it — but it’ll be much more agreeable for you to come home to a workplace than to an ordinary room, which always has something gloomy about it. And it’s that gloom that’s our worst enemy. When the doctor tells me that I have to take better care of myself, physically — well, who knows whether such a measure mightn’t do you good too. For you’re also neither happy nor in good spirits — let’s not mince words, you have too much worry and too little prosperity. But perhaps it’s because of our policy that we’re each too much alone and our forces and resources are too divided, and in that form insufficient. So — unity is strength1 — would certainly be much better. So there has to be more life, it seems to me, and we have to throw out all sorts of doubts and a certain lack of confidence. Do you want a reason on which one can rely to preserve one’s serenity, even when one stands alone and isn’t understood and one’s material well-being has gone by the board? Well there’s still this — I believe — one feels instinctively that a tremendous amount is changing, and everything will change. We’re in the last quarter of a century that will end with another colossal revolution.
   But suppose we both yet see the beginning of it at the end of our lives. We’ll certainly not experience the better times of clear air and refreshment of the whole of society after those great storms. All the same, it’s something not to be taken in by the falseness of one’s time, in so far as one detects in it the unhealthy closeness and mugginess of the hours that precede the thunderstorm. And says — it’s oppressive for us — but the next generations will be able to breathe more freely. Men like Zola and the De Goncourts believe in it with the simplicity of overgrown children. They, the most rigorous analysts — whose diagnosis is both so merciless and so accurate. And particularly the one you mentioned, Turgenev, and Daudet — they don’t work without a goal or without looking towards the other side. Only they all, and rightly, avoid prophesying utopias and are pessimists in so far as if one analyzes, one sees so terribly in the history of this century the way the revolutions fail, no matter how nobly they begin. You see, where one gets support is when one doesn’t always have to walk alone with one’s feelings and thoughts, when one works and thinks in a group of people together. Then at the same time one can do more — and one is infinitely happier. Well I’d already wanted to have that between us for a long time, and you see, I imagine that if you stayed on your own you’d become depressed because the times aren’t encouraging unless one finds satisfaction in one’s work. 
   I’m sending you that novel by De Goncourt specifically for the introduction above all — which contains a résumé of their works and aims. You’ll see that these fellows haven’t been precisely happy, in the same way as Delacroix said about himself, I haven’t been happy at all in the sense in which I understood it / wanted it in the past. Well, whether or not it comes soon — a moment will come for you, too, when you’ll be sure that material well-being has gone by the board, fatally and irrevocably. I’d safely dare say that, but adding this, that I think that at that same moment there will be a certain compensation of feeling a capacity for work. What touches me is the magnificent serenity of the great thinkers of the present day, like, say, the last walk of the two De Goncourts, which you’ll find described. The last days of the ageing Turgenev were like that, too — he was with Daudet a great deal then. Sensitive, subtle, intelligent as women, sensitive to their own suffering, too, and always still full of life and self-assurance, no indifferent stoicism, no contempt for life — I say again, those fellows, they die like women die. No idée fixe about God or abstractions — always on the ground floor of life itself and attached only to that, again, like women who have loved much6 — touched and — as Silvestre says of Delacroix — thus died, almost smiling. Meanwhile, we haven’t yet reached that point, on the contrary we’re at the point of working first, living first — most likely with the normal kind of well-being going by the board. 
   But whatever the future may be, you can be sure that I’d be very pleased indeed if I could work with Cormon for a year or so, unless there’s somewhere better for drawing in L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts or other studios I’ve heard about here. The ancients won’t prevent us from being realistic, come on — on the contrary. Of course I’m also desperately longing for French paintings. Apropos, don’t you like this? 

Everything that is bad came from woman — 
      Clouded
    Reason, an appetite for lucre, betrayal
    Golden cups in which wines are mixed with lees.
    Every crime, every happy lie, every kind of madness
    Comes from her Adore her none the less, since the gods
    Made her... and — she is the best thing that they have made.


 After all, working has the secret of being able to give someone a second youth. Tell me, have you ever read anything by Carlyle? Actually that’s not necessary when one sees the fellow’s face and knows his work is something like Michelet. Whistler and Legros have both made his portrait. That’s another one who dared a great deal and had a different insight on many things from the rest. But the more I look into it, always the same story — lack of money, poor health, opposition, isolation, in short, trouble from beginning to end. Mantz’s piece about Paul Baudry was very good, and I found that ‘he worked on the renewal of the smile’ particularly singular. Could one say of Delacroix ‘he worked on the renewal of passion’? Perhaps so. Anyway — do write soon in any event, and regards. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I definitely need to tell you that it would reassure me greatly if you were to approve my coming to Paris much earlier than June or July if need be. The more I think about it, the more desirable this appears to me. Consider that if everything goes well and if I had good food &c. throughout that time, which will certainly not be plain sailing, consider that even in that case it will take 6 months or so before I’m entirely well. But it would certainly take even longer if things were to be the same for me in Brabant from March to July as they’ve been for the past few months, and it’s likely they’d be no different. Now at the moment it’s just because of reaction to over-exertion that I feel terribly weak, in fact even worse. Still, that’s the natural course of things and nothing unusual. But where the issue is — to take better care of oneself — well in Brabant I’d wear myself out again taking models, the same old story would start all over again, and it doesn’t seem to me that any good could come of it. That way — we’d be straying from the path. So please give me permission to come sooner if need be. In fact I’d say right away, if need be. 
   If I take a garret in Paris, bring my painting box and drawing materials with me — then as far as the work’s concerned I can finish the most pressing things at once — those studies of plaster casts that will certainly help me when I go to Cormon’s. I can go and draw either in the Louvre or in L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts. For the rest, we could then also think about it and discuss it so much better before we go about setting ourselves up somewhere else. Know that I don’t mind going to Nuenen in the month of March if need be and seeing how things are there, and how the people are, and whether or not I can get models. But if that doesn’t work out, which is likely, then after March I could come straight to Paris and start drawing, in the Louvre, for instance. I’ve given a lot of thought to what you wrote about taking a studio — but it seems to me that it would be a good thing if we were to look for it together and that before we start living together permanently — did it for a while — provisionally — and I started by renting a garret at the beginning of April, say, until June. Then I’ll be more accustomed to Paris again by the time I go to Cormon’s. 
       And — I think this way I’ll remain more cheerful. I also have to tell you that although I still go there — it’s often insupportable for me, the carping of the fellows at the academy, for it has proved that they’re still spiteful. However, I make a point of avoiding any quarrel, and go my own way. And I think I’m getting on the track of what I’m looking for, and perhaps I might find it even sooner if I were to sit in front of the plaster casts entirely on my own. All the same, I’m glad I went to the academy, if only because I have ample opportunity to observe the results of starting from the outline, because they do that systematically and they pick petty quarrels2 with me about it. Make an outline first — your outline isn’t right — I won’t correct that if you model before having conscientiously finished your outline. You see, it all comes down to that. And you really should see!!! how flat, how dead and how bloody boring the results of that system are. Oh, I tell you, I’m very glad to have seen it properly at close quarters — David or even worse — Pieneman4 in full bloom. I must have wanted to say at least twenty-five times — your outline’s just a trick &c. — but I haven’t thought it worthwhile arguing. All the same, even though I don’t say anything, I irritate them — and they me. This doesn’t matter so much, though — the issue is to really go on trying to find a better system of working. So, patience and perseverance. They go so far as to say — colour and modelling, that’s nothing, one learns that very quickly — it’s the outline that’s the essential thing and the most difficult. 
       You see, one can learn something new at the academy — I never knew before that colour and modelling came of their own accord. Just yesterday I finished a drawing that I’ve made for the competition in the evening class. It’s the Germanicus figure that you know. Very well — I know for sure that I’ll certainly come last, because all the drawings by the others are the same, and mine is completely different. But I saw the drawing that will be considered to be the best being done — I was sitting just behind — and it’s correct, it’s anything you like, but it’s dead and so are all those drawings that I saw. Enough about this — just let it bore us so much that we become enthusiastic about something nobler. And that we make haste to achieve it. You also need to take better care of yourself, and should we succeed in uniting, the two of us would know more than each one individually, and could do more. Tell me, did you notice that subtle remark of Paul Mantz’s — women are perhaps the supreme difficulty in life — it was in the article on Baudry? We’ll certainly experience our share of that, aside from what we may already have experienced. It struck me in a chapter from Zola’s L’oeuvre in Gil Blas — that the painter — Manet, of course — had a scene with a woman who had posed for him and had then cooled to the idea; oh curiously well described. What one can learn at the academy in this regard is — just don’t paint women then. They hardly ever use nude female models, not at all in class at any rate — very occasionally individually. Even in the plaster cast class, 10 male figures as against 1 female figure. That’s nice and easy. That must surely be better in Paris — and it occurs to me that one actually learns so much by constantly comparing male and female, which are always so very different in everything. It may be the supreme difficulty, but what would art and what would life be without that? Regards, write back about this soon, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My being in Nuenen, at least for the month of March, would be because of the move, and I ought to go there for myself because of changing my abode. But if need be, as far as I’m concerned, I’d be prepared not to go back at all. My dear Theo, I write to you often these days and often the same, but see it as proof that I have one thing on my mind above all — the need to embark on that period of figure drawing. Moreover — you may call it selfish — I want to have my health restored. My impression of the time that I’ve been here doesn’t change either — in a way I’m very disappointed with what I’ve done here — but my ideas have changed and been refreshed, and that was actually the goal I had in mind in coming here. As far as my health is concerned, though, I’ve observed that I relied on it too much and that, although the core is still good, I’m just a ruin of what I might have been. So it wouldn’t surprise me in the slightest if you were also in just as much need in the strongest possible terms of that better way of life that was prescribed for me. If I’m not mistaken in this, then I believe that we can’t be together too soon, and I continue to see drawbacks to a stay in the country. For although the air there may be invigorating, I would miss the distractions and sociability of the city. From which we could benefit so much more still if we were together. As for you, I shouldn’t be surprised if — if I may now speak as I find — office life had mechanized you too much, let’s say for a good few years. 
   And a very subtle and more refined and more artistic intelligence was somewhat sterilized. Now, though, that’s what we need to revive again and bring back to life. And were we to be together much more in the near future, I’d disappoint you in things for sure, but not in everything and not in my way of looking at things, I believe. I want to tell you at the start of our conversation about one thing and another that I wish that before too long we could both have acquired a wife, one way or another. Because it’s high time, and because we’d be no better off if we were to wait a long while to do it. Anyway — all that quite coolly. But it’s pretty much a prerequisite for living better. And I mention it because we may perhaps have a huge difficulty to overcome in this respect. And on which much depends. And I’m just breaking the ice about it here; we’ll always have to come back to it. And in relationships with women one learns so much specifically about art. Pity that as one learns by degrees, so by degrees one ceases to be young. But were that not so, life would be too good. Have you read that introduction to Chérie by De Goncourt yet? When one looks at it, the mass of work those fellows got through is colossal. 
   It’s such a brilliant idea, working and thinking in concert. And every day I find evidence supporting the proposition that a major reason for many misfortunes among artists lies in the discord between them, in not cooperating, in being nasty, not kind, to one another. And now if we were wiser in this respect, I don’t doubt for a moment that  we’d be on a better path and happier in a year’s time. I’m not getting on very well with the work but I’m not forcing it either, because to all intents and purposes it’s actually forbidden me. And I want to save my strength for that initial period in Paris, should that be the most obvious thing to do first, without an intervening period except, then, for that one month. For I’d like to arrive there fresh. Today — Sunday — it was almost a spring day — this morning I went for a long walk on my own, all through the city, in the park, along the boulevards. It was such weather that in the countryside one would probably have heard the lark for the first time. And in short there was something of a resurrection in the atmosphere. All the same, how depressed the mood is in business and among the people. I don’t think it’s exaggerating when one takes a gloomy view of the various strikes2 &c. everywhere. They certainly aren’t worthless for later generations, because then the cause will have been won. But for now, of course, it’s gloomy enough for everyone who has to earn his living, all the more so since we can foresee that it will get worse and worse from year to year. The working man against the bourgeois — is as justified as the third estate against the other two  a hundred years ago. And the best thing is to keep quiet, because the bourgeois don’t have fate on their side, and we’ll experience more of it. We’re by no means at the end yet. So although it’s spring — how many thousands and thousands are walking around desolate? I see just as clearly as the greatest optimist the lark ascending in the spring sky. But I also see the young girl of barely 20, who could have been healthy and  has contracted consumption — and perhaps will drown herself before she dies of a disease. 
   When one is always in respectable company and among reasonably well-to-do citizens, one may perhaps not notice it so much — but when, like me, one has been through very hard times, then it’s impossible to ignore the fact that great hardship is a factor that weighs in the balance. One may not be able to cure or save, but one can nonetheless sympathize and share in it. Corot, who had serenity if anyone did, who truly felt the spring, wasn’t he as simple as a working man and thus sensible of all the misfortunes of others all his life? And something that struck me in a biography of him — when he was already very old in 70-71, he certainly still looked up into the clear sky, but — at the same time he visited the ambulances where the wounded lay dying. Illusions may fade — but what endures is the sublime — if one were to doubt everything, one wouldn’t doubt fellows like Corot and Millet and Delacroix. And I think that in moments when one doesn’t care about nature any more, one still cares about people. If you can send me a bit more this month, be it a lot or be it little, but even if it’s only five francs, don’t neglect to do it, and if you can’t, you can’t. I’m really looking forward to hearing your decision as to whether for your part you would approve if I were to come to Paris as early as somewhere around 1 April. In any event, write to me about it soon. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m really looking forward to hearing from you. For the time when I have to decide has come. We only have about 10 days until the end of the month, and I do need to know what’s what. But anyway, for my part I’ve decided — only it would be pleasant for me if you could see it the same way as I do. If you agree that the plan of coming to Paris should go ahead as soon as possible — in other words after I’ve been in Brabant for a short while — then I’ll send you from here the studies and drawings I have here. I wanted to get on with that, though. Because otherwise I’ll have to be here for even longer. I’d also so very much like to get the work on my teeth finished. What should I do? Altogether I’ve got one franc fifty left — and as for food, I’ve still got five francs credit until the end of the month. It’s desirable for so many reasons that we take the step of changing quickly. You understand that I can’t afford to take painting materials with me from here to Brabant — so I’ll probably be in a double fix there, both for models and for paint. So there’s no choice — for that matter what need is there for a choice, for what’s most pressing has to be done first, and that’s this period of drawing nudes and plaster casts. 
   I write to you rather curtly, perhaps, but it may not be put off. For the rest, it actually goes without saying that  there can’t be a single objection to finding a temporary garret in Paris right away, on the very first day I arrive — and then I can go to the Louvre or L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts for that drawing, and that way it’ll be all the more successful at Cormon’s. So let’s not delay or get involved in long-winded discussions. We have to put our backs into it; well then, we’ll do that. If we ever want to do anything good, depend upon it that it will increasingly come down to decisiveness and to quite swift action and that, while despite all the effort one might put in, no one can know with certainty the results of his enterprises in advance, some courage and promptness of action can do no harm. If it were in any way possible, I’d like to have the second half of that work on my teeth done this month. I’d like to pack up my studies and send them to you, and leave on the last day of this month or even a few days earlier. But not stay on into March, on account of the rent. Would there be a possibility of that? 
   Then I can help with the packing at home if it could be of any use to them. And if I could do a little painting or drawing there, so much the better. But — the sooner and more energetically we get through that period of drawing in Paris, the better for the whole future. Even what I’ve done in these few weeks here has helped, I feel. And if I didn’t do it, then I would, even though I found it in a different way in nature itself, then I’d always have trouble with fellows who had been at some academy or other — that I couldn’t2 draw — according to them. I still don’t know how things will turn out for me in the end at the academy here — I wrote and told you recently, didn’t I, about how they’d deliberately picked a quarrel with me. I heard yesterday that Siberdt — the teacher — had said somewhere that I had a good understanding of drawing and that he’d been rather too hasty. Since he doesn’t come into the class all that often, I haven’t seen him in several days. I’m working on a female torso at the moment. Regards — but write as soon as you can. My constitution is more or less the same, but still I think it’s beginning to improve. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent 
   If I didn’t do it — go to Paris, that is — then I wouldn’t get any better — for I have to do something about earning more. I’m doing myself no good at all now — if nothing had to be taken off, one could live perfectly well on 150 francs, but there’s always too much to come off. But still, my health is improving — and it will come right. My dear Theo, It’s at the moment when my money has entirely gone — entirely — that I write to you again. If you can send anything, even if it were five francs, don’t neglect to do it; there are still 10 days in the month and how am I to get through them? For I have absolutely nothing left. Nothing left even at the baker’s. I only know that all these things definitely make me see than I can do nothing other than act as I’ve told you. That’s to say, not postpone going to Paris. For the rest, you’ll notice in the latest work which you haven’t seen yet that if I give painting something of a rest, I do it very calmly because working with a brush won’t easily elude me. I’ll also send you the drawings from the plaster casts;2 this is unfamiliar to me and I’ll get it differently. Like the female torso3 I finished today, which is much more distinguished in the modelling and less brusque than the first ones, where in spite of myself the figures have something of the peasant or woodcutter about them. If I hadn’t been ill &c., by the way, I’d have been able to do more here. What we have to do is go forward very calmly — but no progress can be made with drawing, and yet that’s the most urgent. 
   And I’m quite sure that it will help me at Cormon’s if I spend the interim doing nothing but drawing. Cormon will be like the others in that he won’t have much time, whatever he may be like otherwise. And anyone who wants to go to those fellows for advice must take with them as much prior knowledge as possible. And it’s definitely to be expected that almost all of them who are in his studio will have gone through a great many plaster casts, and that (no matter how free, how liberal the studio may be otherwise) one relies on that quite heavily. So let’s do it sensibly. They have some interest, but not a lot, in studies that one makes outdoors. And the fellows who’ve been in Paris all tell me the same thing. At Cormon’s I’ll have to paint some test or other of a nude figure from life — probably4 — and the more I have the structure fixed in my mind in advance the better, and the more he’ll be able and willing to tell me. And furthermore, we’ll see whether we can get on together — I hope so — but if it didn’t work, then we’d know something more definite about it if we’d had that provisional trial for a few months first. 
   I definitely believe that we can manage and get back on our feet. But it would be folly if we didn’t discuss it quite coolly and calmly. And we must, both you and I, take care of our health. And what I’m saying about coming straight to Paris is a saving for you because, what with going back and forth, and starting relatively expensive work in Brabant, we won’t manage with the usual, and in Paris we will. And if it turns out better than expected with the money, so much the better, then we won’t be so hard up and could stock up on painting materials before the summer so that everything doesn’t come at once. Don’t take it amiss of me if I also calculate what’s possible and impossible for once. I re-read Bracquemond’s book5 again, and I find it better each time. I do realize that you don’t agree with me about coming straight to Paris, otherwise you would 
   already have answered me. And all the same, it’s better that it should happen immediately — I have the opportunity here to consult fellows about it who do really good work, and I’m entirely convinced that this would be the best. For that matter, it could have happened sooner. Things have been too bad recently and I was too hard up. And so we must put our backs into it. Don’t worry about it too much, because we won’t fail. But what I tell you is true — from the time I send this letter off until I receive your reply, which I hope will cross this, I have nothing and it’s fasting time again. Anyway — we’ll hope that we’ll be together in a while — and that the worst will be over. Regards, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent I’ve just read Dumas’s Dame aux camelias, it’s very good — do you know it? I don’t trust the people where I live;7 if you send a letter with money, as you did recently, it’s safer just to register it for that reason. My dear Theo, I tore up a letter that I wrote to you first, and that’s why you’re receiving my reply a little later. I’ll start by thanking you for the 50 francs. Which I appreciate as, for that matter, I do everything you do for me. But as I started to say, your letter disappoints me since you don’t accede to my request, because I still continue to believe so strongly that the reasons which I gave you in my last letter for preferring to come even sooner were justified. But since I don’t want to argue about that, after all, I just wanted to ask you to reconsider it again. With a view to Cormon, it’s decidedly better for me to go on drawing plaster casts rather than working outdoors, because the more I have the structure of the figure in my head, the better I’ll be able to follow. I’ll be dealing with fellows who’ve been drawing plaster casts for years; if I do it for months, it’s not too much. 
   Because I’ve always worked from nature, I may perhaps be more daring than many others in dashing things off and tackling a group of things. But the others will most likely have more knowledge of the nude, for which I haven’t had so much opportunity. If I make up for that — the sooner the better — the more benefit I’ll get from Cormon. Moreover, my health — when I paint outdoors I don’t eat — and I won’t overcome it. For I keep relapsing; my constitution is still far from strong. And now as regards the cost, I believe it’s six of one and half a dozen of the other. So think it over carefully again. We must act, because we have to put our backs into it. While I’ve been here — all this time — I’ve had a comrade, an old Frenchman. I’ve painted his portrait, which Verlat liked1 and which you will see. 
   The winter was even harder for him than for me, and the poor devil is in a much worse state than I am, since his age makes it very critical. Today I went with him to the same doctor I went to myself, and he’ll probably have to go into hospital and undergo an operation, which will be decided tomorrow. I eventually got him to that point, but he was dreading it so much that it took a long time before I could persuade him to go and hear the verdict. He knew that it was likely to be something quite serious and dared not entrust himself to the hospital doctor. I’m curious as to what will be decided. It’s possible I may stay here a few days longer in March for his sake. After all, there’s nothing in the world as interesting as people, and one is never done with studying them. And that’s why people like Turgenev are great masters, because they learn to look at a person. The books of the present, since Balzac, say, are unlike anything written in other centuries — and better perhaps. 
   I’m really looking forward to Turgenev just now because I’ve read a piece about him by Daudet in which both the man himself as a character and his work were analyzed — extremely good. For he’s an example as a person, and in his old age he was still young as regards continuing to work, as regards always being dissatisfied with himself, and trying to do it better and better all the time. Regards — but do think about it again carefully; it would greatly reassure me if you could see the matter as I do. And I wouldn’t insist on it like this if I didn’t think it was necessary, with a view to June, specifically, for me to go on drawing plaster casts at once. Anyway, write to me soon. For my own pleasure I’d rather paint something else, but as far as practical use is concerned, it’s unavoidable. With a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent It’s precisely because I think, after all, that I’ve derived benefit from coming to Antwerp that I believe we should go straight on. My dear Theo, I’m writing to you once again, because in any event my time here is almost up and I have to go back one of these days. The time when one can work outdoors could be upon us with the slightest change in the weather and so, if I have to and if you’re absolutely set on it, at least my being in Brabant wouldn’t be entirely fruitless. Yet be that as it may, I still continue to urge you rather to go ahead with the Cormon plan and what, for my part, I would so much like to precede it — a further period continuing to draw plaster casts. My health, I fancy, is beginning to improve a little in so far as I’m beginning to be able to digest my food somewhat better. But it’s still uncertain all the same, and one day’s unlike another. I’ve finished another drawing of a plaster cast, and since I wrote and told you that the teacher had indirectly let it be known that he hadn’t meant to be so harsh2 I haven’t had any more trouble with him, and he even said that the drawing I did today needed virtually no change in proportion 
   and none at all in tone. So I’d almost dare hope that I’ll also be able to get on with Cormon, whatever he may be like, and that makes me long to be there all the more. Anyway — if I’m fortunate with my health, I hope to make progress this year. I also still continue to think that it will be possible to find work to do, although things haven’t gone very well for me in this respect. Still, my time is very much taken up by the work at the academy. From what I hear about what people sometimes sell, it’s usually portraits. There must be a good exhibition of Impressionists in Brussels. You see, since I’ve seen and heard how they set about it from other fellows here who concentrate on the figure — and bear in mind they’re all such as have more to spend than I — they’ve always used the models in some studio or other in town — precisely because of the cost. And this way one gets correction and one sees others working at the same time. And now I can’t help keep getting the idea that we should perhaps have taken this step 
   a good two or two and a half years ago — all the more reason not to put it off it this time. In the end, Antwerp suited me well. Of course I wish I’d come here with the experience of it that I have now, at the moment I’m leaving. But if that were possible, things would be easier, and one always begins by coming in green. I hope, though, to come back to Antwerp sometime, because there’s something free and artistic about the life here, if one looks for it, perhaps more than anywhere else. What’s more, one sees all sorts of people, English, French, Germans, Belgians, and that makes for variety. If there’s a city that resembles Paris, then it’s Antwerp rather than Brussels, in all respects. Firstly because it’s a centre for people of all nationalities, secondly because of business, and thirdly because there’s gusto and people enjoy themselves. I’d be happy to stay if the course at the academy were continuing. But unfortunately there’s nothing there until May except for the competitions4 and the day class for plaster casts, and those are coming to an end too. 
   And I’ve certainly not seen Antwerp at its best now, for from what one generally hears it’s usually much livelier still, and now there are two crises depressing it at the same time — firstly the general one, and then on top of that the aftermath of the exhibition, too, in the shape of numerous fraudulent or common bankruptcies. Think carefully about whether we couldn’t find a combination that would make it possible for me to be in Paris before June. I’d like it so much, because I believe that it would be better for so many reasons, which I’ve already told you. To which I may also add that it seems to me that we could discuss taking a studio by June so much better if we were both already in Paris beforehand and could size up the pros and cons of the situation. Anyway. Write to me again soon, with a handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Don’t be cross with me that I’ve come all of a sudden. I’ve thought about it so much and I think we’ll save time this way. Will be at the Louvre from midday, or earlier if you like. A reply, please, to let me know when you could come to the Salle Carrée. As for expenses, I repeat, it comes to the same thing. I have some money left, that goes without saying, and I want to talk to you before spending anything. We’ll sort things out, you’ll see. So get there as soon as possible. I shake your hand. Yours truly, Vincent My dear friend, Enclosed a letter that arrived yesterday but which the concierge didn’t pass on to me straightaway. I’ve been to the Tambourin, because if I didn’t go there people would have thought I didn’t dare. So I told Miss Segatori that I wouldn’t pass judgement on her over this affair, but that it was up to her to judge herself. That I’d torn up the receipt for the paintings — but that she had to give everything back.  That if she hadn’t had something to do with what happened to me she would have come to see me the next day. That as she didn’t come to see me I would take it that she knew people were trying to pick a fight with me, but that she’d tried to warn me by saying — go away — which I didn’t understand, and besides would perhaps not have wanted to understand. 
   To which she replied that the paintings and all the rest4 were at my disposal. She claimed that I’d tried to pick a fight — which doesn’t surprise me — knowing that appalling things would be done to her if she took my side. I also saw the waiter on my way in, but he made himself scarce. Now I didn’t want to take the paintings straightaway, but I said that when you got back we’d have a chat about it, because those paintings belonged to you as much as to me, and while waiting I urged her to think again about what had happened. She didn’t look well and she was as pale as wax, which isn’t a good sign. 
   She didn’t know that the waiter had gone up to your place. If that’s true — I would be even more inclined to believe it was more the case that she’d tried to warn me people were trying to pick a fight with me, than that she’d been up to something herself. She can’t do as she’d like. Now I’ll wait till you get back before doing anything. I’ve done two paintings since you left. Now I have two louis6 left, and I fear I won’t know how to get through the days from now till you get back. Because remember when I started working at Asnières7 I had lots of canvases and Tanguy was very good to me. He still is, when it comes down to it, but his old witch of a wife8 noticed what was going on and objected to it. Now I gave Tanguy’s wife a piece of my mind and said it was her fault if I wouldn’t buy anything else from them. Père Tanguy’s wise enough to 
   keep quiet, and he’ll do what I ask of him all the same. But with all that it isn’t easy to work. I saw Lautrec today, he’s sold a painting, through Portier, I think.  Someone brought in a watercolour by Mrs Mesdag, which I find very beautiful. Now I hope you’ll enjoy your visit over there, give my mother, Cor and Wil my warm regards. And if you can see that I’m not in too much trouble from now till you get back by sending me something more, I’ll try to make some more paintings for you — because I’m perfectly calm as far as my work goes. What bothered me a bit in this business was that by not going (to the Tambourin) it looked cowardly. And having gone there restored my peace of mind. I shake your hand. Vincent My dear friend, I thank you for your letter and for what it contained.  I feel sad that even if successful, painting won’t bring in what it costs. I was touched by what you wrote about home – ‘they’re doing quite well, but it’s sad to see them nevertheless’. But a dozen years ago or so one would have sworn that the family would continue to prosper after all, and that things would work out well. It would please our mother greatly if your marriage came off, and for your health and business affairs you shouldn’t remain single anyway. Myself — I feel I’m losing the desire for marriage and children, and at times I’m quite melancholy to be like that at 35 when I ought to feel quite differently. And sometimes I blame this damned painting. 
   It was Richepin who said somewhere the love of art makes us lose real love.  I find that terribly true, but on the other hand real love puts you right off art.  And sometimes I already feel old and broken, but still sufficiently in love to stop me being enthusiastic about painting. To succeed you have to have ambition, and ambition seems absurd to me. I don’t know what will come of it. Most of all, I’d like to be less of a burden to you — and that’s not impossible from now on. Because I hope to make progress in such a way that you’ll be able to show what I’m doing, with confidence, without compromising yourself. And then I’m going to retreat to somewhere in the south so as not to see so many painters who repel me as men. You can be sure of one thing, and that’s that I won’t try to do any more work for the Tambourin. I think it’s going to change hands, too, and of course I’m not against that.
   As far as Miss Segatori is concerned, that’s another matter altogether, I still feel affection for her and I hope she still feels some for me. But now she’s in an awkward position, she’s neither free nor mistress in her own house, and most of all, she’s sick and ill. Although I wouldn’t say so in public — I’m personally convinced she’s had an abortion (unless of course she had a miscarriage) — whatever the case, in her situation I wouldn’t blame her. In two months she’ll be better, I hope, and then perhaps she’ll be grateful that I didn’t bother her. Mind you, if she were to refuse in good health and in cold blood to give me back what’s mine, or did me any kind of harm, I wouldn’t be easy on her — but that won’t be necessary. But I know her well enough still to trust her. 
   And there again, if she manages to keep her place going, from the commercial point of view I wouldn’t blame her for preferring to be the one who eats and not the one who gets eaten. If she stepped on my toes a bit in order to succeed — if need be — she has carte blanche. When I saw her again she didn’t hurt my feelings, which she would have done if she was as nasty as people say she is. I saw Tanguy yesterday and he put a canvas I had just done in his window, I’ve done four since you left, and I have a big one on the go. I’m well aware that these big, long canvases are hard to sell, but in time people will see that there’s open air and good cheer in them. Now the whole lot will make a decoration for a dining room or a house in the country. And if you really fell in love and then got married, I wouldn’t think it impossible that you too might manage to get hold of a house in the country, like so many other picture dealers. If you live well you spend more, but you also gain more ground, and perhaps these days we do better if we look rich than if we look hard up. It’s better to have fun than to kill yourself. Warm regards to all at home. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, During the journey I thought at least as much about you as about the new country I was seeing. But I tell myself that you’ll perhaps come here often yourself later on. It seems to me almost impossible to be able to work in Paris, unless you have a refuge in which to recover and regain your peace of mind and self-composure. Without that, you’d be bound to get utterly numbed. Now I’ll tell you that for a start, there’s been a snowfall of at least 60 centimetres all over, and it’s still snowing. Arles doesn’t seem any bigger than Breda or Mons to me.  Before reaching Tarascon3 I noticed some magnificent scenery — huge yellow rocks, oddly jumbled together, with the most imposing shapes. In the small valleys between these rocks there were 
   rows of little round trees with olive-green or grey-green foliage, which could well be lemon trees. But here in Arles the land seems flat.  I noticed some magnificent plots of red earth planted with vines, with mountains in the background of the most delicate lilac. And the landscape under the snow with the white peaks against a sky as bright as the snow was just like the winter landscapes the Japanese did. Here’s my address Restaurant Carrel 30 rue Cavalerie Arles4 So far I’ve taken no more than a little walk round the town, as I was more or less completely done in last night. I’ll write to you soon — an antique dealer whose shop I went into yesterday in this very street was telling me he knew of a Monticelli. With a good handshake to you and the pals. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your kind letter and the 50-franc note. So far I’m not finding living here as profitable as I might have hoped, but I’ve finished three studies, which I would probably not have been able to do in Paris these days. I was glad the news from Holland was fairly satisfactory. As far as Reid goes, I wouldn’t be very surprised if — (wrongly, however) — he took it badly that I went to the south before him. For us to say we’d never have benefited from knowing him would be relatively unfair since, 1, he made us a gift of a very fine painting (which painting, let it be said by the way, we intended to acquire), 2, Reid made Monticellis go up in value, and since we own 5 of them the result for us is that these paintings have increased in value5 — 3, he was good and pleasant company in the first months.
   Now for our part we wanted him to take part in a bigger deal than the Monticelli one, and he pretended not to understand very much about it. It seems to me that in order to be even more clearly entitled to stay masters on our own terrain regarding the Impressionists — so that there can be no doubt about our good faith towards Reid — we could leave him alone and let him do as he thinks fit regarding the Marseille Monticellis. Making the point that dead painters are only of indirect interest to us from the monetary point of view. And if you agree with this, if need be you can tell him on my behalf too that if he intends to come to Marseille to buy Monticellis he has nothing to fear from us, but that we’re entitled to ask him his intentions in this regard, given that we came to this territory before he did. 
   About the Impressionists — it would seem fair to me that they should be introduced into England through you, if not by you in person. And if Reid made a move first, we’d be justified in thinking he had acted in bad faith towards us, all the more so since we’d have left him free regarding the Marseille Monticellis. You would definitely be doing our friend Koning a favour if you let him stay with you8 — his visit to Rivet must have proved to him that it wasn’t we who advised him badly. If you did feel like taking him in — and it seems to me that it would get him out of a mess, you’d just have to get things straight with his father, so that you wouldn’t have any responsibilities, even indirect ones. If you see Bernard tell him that so far I’m having to pay more than at Pont-Aven, but that I think if you live here in furnished rooms with middle-class people it must be possible to save money, which I’m trying to do, and as soon as I’ve found out I’ll write and tell him what seem to me the average expenses. At times it seems to me that my blood is more or 
   less ready to start circulating again, which wasn’t the case lately in Paris, I really couldn’t stand it any more. I have to buy my colours and canvases from either a grocer or a bookseller, who don’t have everything one might wish for. I’ll definitely have to go to Marseille to see what the state of these things is like there. I had hoped to find some beautiful blue &c., and in fact I haven’t given up, seeing that in Marseille you should be able to buy raw materials first hand. And I’d like to be able to do blues like Ziem — which don’t change as much as the others, well, we’ll see. Don’t worry, and give the pals a handshake for me. Yours truly, Vincent The studies I have are an old woman of Arles, a landscape with snow, a view of a stretch of pavement with a butcher’s shop. The women really are beautiful here, it’s no joke14 — on the other hand, the Arles museum is dreadful and a joke, and fit to be in Tarascon15 — there’s also a museum of antiquities, they’re genuine. My dear Theo, Would you read the letter I’ve written to Mr Tersteeg — and would you send it to him with a letter from you if you judge the move is right. You see, for myself I thought we had to make an effort from this end, because we’ll have Reid through Van Wisselingh2 and Van Wisselingh through Tersteeg. And that’s what you’ll explain to Tersteeg yourself. Fed as I am by you — and as you draw your own income from the firm of Boussod Valadon & Cie, I don’t want to do anything against the firm. On the contrary, I ask no more than this, that what you’ve started in the shop on the boulevard should last and become more important. But you need support from other employees in the firm. If Tersteeg refuses to get involved in it we still have Reid and Wisselingh as English agents. You know that Van W. has married the daughter of the Glasgow picture dealer who’s in competition with Reid. If Reid takes the Impressionists, if he finds a way of starting up there, 
   and if he tries to do that against the rest of us, from that moment we’re entitled to let his opponent over there know what’s going on. But if Wisselingh ever gets involved, and especially if today or tomorrow you have a chat with W., Tersteeg could immediately complain: why did you, esteemed employee of our firm, who handles the Impressionists, not tell me what was going on? So you’ll have to talk to Tersteeg about it first, and to save you the trouble of writing a long letter it is I who have written it this time. You could add to it by saying something vague about the question of Reid and the Impressionists and the interest that Van Wisselingh may subsequently have, hence the complications of this matter. And what I’ve said in a postscript, namely that in view of the low prices compared with the interest the paintings present, Tersteeg should easily be able to sell about fifty in Holland, and besides he’ll be obliged to have some, because if people are already talking about them in Antwerp and 
   Brussels, they’ll be talking about them in Amsterdam and The Hague too before long. Anyway, what’s proposed in the letter is by no means unpleasant either for Tersteeg or for you: you’ll show him round all the studios and he’ll see for himself that next year people will be talking a lot and will keep on talking about the new school for a long time. If, though, you think the letter is badly timed you have my full permission to burn it. But if you send it, suggest the same thing to him yourself. But you’re well aware that Tersteeg is at home in English business matters like a fish in water, and so it’s entirely possible that it’s he who would control the way these new paintings are doing over there. Really, this way Tersteeg and the London manager7 would organize the permanent exhibition of the Impressionists in London — you would have the one in Paris and I would start it up in Marseille. But Tersteeg will have to see a lot for himself first, and that’s why a grand tour of the studios is a good idea at this point; you’ll explain to him the whole importance of the matter as you go round.  The artists’ association is all the more likely to come about since Tersteeg
   won’t be against our having the artists’ interests at heart, nor that above all we want to increase the cost price of a painting, which in fact wouldn’t be saleable if it cost nothing. In any case, we’ve got to talk about this boldly now, haven’t we — and Mesdag and others have got to stop POKING FUN at the Impressionists. It will be helpful in any case for Tersteeg to be interviewed on this subject. You see that for myself I still see the crux of the matter in England, either artists will give their work to the dealers over there at miserable prices, or artists will get together and themselves choose intelligent agents who aren’t usurers. Now think the matter over — and send the letter or burn it, as you think best. It’s not a cut and dried thing I want to send you, but I’d very much like to see Tersteeg involved because he has the necessary self-assurance. I shake your hand firmly. Vincent I have one more study. My dear Theo I was very pleased to receive your letter and the rough draft of the letter to Tersteeg and the 50-franc note. Your letter to Tersteeg is perfectly good in the draft, I hope you didn’t spoil it too much when making a fair copy. It seems to me that your letter to Tersteeg adds to mine — myself, I regretted the state in which I had posted it. Because you’ll have noticed that the idea of getting Tersteeg to take the initiative in introducing the Impressionists to England only came to me when writing the actual letter, and was only partially expressed in a P.S. added afterwards. While in your letter you explain that idea to him more fully. Will he understand? Indeed — it concerns him. I’ve had a letter here from Gauguin, who says he’s been ill in bed for a fortnight. That he’s broke, since he’s had to pay off some pressing debts. That he’d like to know if you’ve sold anything for him but that he can’t write to you for fear of bothering you. That he’s under so much pressure to earn a little money he’d be determined to reduce the price of his paintings still further. I can do nothing about this business from my end except write to Russell, which I’ll do this very day. 
   And after all, we’ve already tried to get Tersteeg to buy one. But what can we do, he must really be hard up. I’m sending you a few lines for him in case you have something to tell him, but open letters if any come for me, because you’ll know sooner what’s in them if you do that and that will save me the trouble of telling you what’s in them. This goes once and for all. Would you risk buying the seascape from him for the firm? If that were possible he would be out of difficulties for the time being. Now it’s very good that you’ve taken in young Koning, I’m so glad you won’t be living alone in your apartment. In Paris one is always suffering, like a cab-horse, and if on top of that you have to live alone in your stable it would be too much. About the Independents’ exhibition, do whatever you see fit. What would you say to showing the two large landscapes of the Butte Montmartre there? It’s all much the same to me, 
   I’m inclined to place slightly more hopes in this year’s work. There’s a hard frost here, and out in the country there’s still snow — I have a study of a whitened landscape with the town in the background. And then 2 little studies of a branch of an almond tree that’s already in flower despite everything. Enough for today, I’m writing a note to Koning. I’m really very pleased that you’ve written to Tersteeg, and I have hopes that this will be the renewal of your relations in Holland. With a handshake to you and to any pals you may meet. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Now at long last, this morning the weather has changed and has turned milder — and I’ve already had an opportunity to find out what this mistral’s1 like too. I’ve been out on several hikes round about here, but that wind always made it impossible to do anything. The sky was a hard blue with a great bright sun that melted just about all the snow — but the wind was so cold and dry it gave you goose-pimples. But even so I’ve seen lots of beautiful things — a ruined abbey on a hill planted with hollies, pines and grey olive trees. We’ll get down to that soon, I hope. Now I’ve just finished a study like the one of mine Lucien Pissarro has, but this time it’s of oranges. That makes eight studies I have up to now. But that doesn’t count, as I haven’t yet been able to work in comfort and in the warm. 
   The letter from Gauguin that I had intended to send you but which for a moment I thought I had burned with some other papers, I later found and enclose herewith. But I’ve already written to him direct and I’ve sent him Russell’s address as well as sending Gauguin’s to Russell, so that if they wish they can make direct contact. But as for many of us — and surely we’ll be among them ourselves — the future is still difficult. I do believe in a final victory, but will artists benefit from it, and will they see more peaceful days? I’ve bought some coarse canvas here and I’ve had it prepared for matt effects, I can now get everything, more or less, at Paris prices. On Saturday evening I had a visit from two amateur painters, 
   one of whom is a grocer — and also sells painting materials — and the other a justice of the peace who seems kind and intelligent. Unfortunately I’m hardly managing to live more cheaply than in Paris, I need to allow 5 francs a day. For the moment I haven’t found anything like a boarding-house, but there must surely be some. If the weather also gets milder in Paris it will do you good. What a winter! I daren’t roll up my studies yet because they’re hardly dry, and there are some areas of impasto that won’t dry for a while. I’ve just read Tartarin sur les Alpes, which I greatly enjoyed. Has that bloody man Tersteeg written to you? That’ll do us good anyway — don’t worry. If he doesn’t reply, he’ll hear people talking about us all the same, and we’ll make sure he has nothing to fault in what we do. For example, we’ll send Mrs Mauve a painting in memory of Mauve10 with a letter as well from us both in which, if Tersteeg doesn’t reply, we won’t say a word against 
   him but we’ll make it understood that we don’t deserve to be treated as though we were dead. In fact, it’s likely that Tersteeg won’t be predisposed against us after all. That poor Gauguin has no luck, I do fear that in his case convalescence will take longer than the fortnight he had to spend in bed. For Christ’s sake, when are we going to see a generation of artists with healthy bodies? Sometimes I’m really furious with myself because it isn’t good enough to be iller or less ill than others, the ideal thing would be to have a strong enough constitution to live for 80 years and along with that, blood that was real good blood. But we could take comfort if we felt that a generation of more fortunate artists was going to come along. I wanted to write to you straightaway that I’m hopeful winter’s over now and I hope it will be the same in Paris. Handshake. Yours truly, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and the 100-franc note enclosed with it. I very much hope that Tersteeg will come to Paris soon, as you’re inclined to believe. That would be very desirable in the circumstances you describe, in which they are all at bay and hard up. I find what you write about the Lançon sale and the painter’s mistress very interesting. He’s done things of really great character, his drawing has often made me think of Mauve’s. I’m sorry not to have seen the exhibition of his studies, just as I’m really sorry not to have seen the Willette exhibition either. What do you say to the news that Kaiser Wilhelm is dead? Will that speed up events in France, and will Paris stay calm? It seems doubtful. And what effect will all this have on the trade in paintings? I’ve read that it seems there’s a possibility of abolishing import duty on paintings in America, is that true?  Perhaps it would be easier to get a few dealers and art lovers to agree to buy Impressionist paintings than to get the artists to agree to share equally the price of paintings sold. Nevertheless, artists won’t find a better way than — to join together, give their pictures to the association, and share the sale price in such a way that at least the society will be able to guarantee the possibility of existence and work for its members. 
   If Degas, Claude Monet, Renoir, Sisley and C. Pissarro were to take the initiative and say: here we are, each of the 5 of us gives 10 paintings (or rather, we each give to the value of 10, francs, the value estimated by expert members, for example, Tersteeg and yourself, appointed by the society, and these experts also invest capital in the form of paintings), and, furthermore, we commit ourselves to give to the value of... each year. And we also invite you, Guillaumin, Seurat, Gauguin &c. &c. to join us (your pictures being put to the same assessment from the point of view of value). Then the great Impressionists of the Grand Boulevard, giving paintings that become common property, would retain their prestige, and the others wouldn’t be able to criticize them for keeping to themselves the benefits of a reputation gained without any doubt by their own efforts and by their individual genius in the first place — but — nevertheless, in the second place, a reputation that is growing and is now also being consolidated and supported by the paintings of a whole battalion of artists who have so far been working while constantly broke. 
   Whatever happens — it’s really to be hoped that the thing comes off, and that you and Tersteeg become the society’s expert members (with Portier perhaps?). I have two more studies of landscapes, I hope the work will continue steadily and that in a month I’ll get a first consignment to you — I say in a month because I want to send you nothing but the best, and because I want it to be dry, and because I want to send at least a dozen or so all at once because of the cost of transport. Congratulations on buying the Seurat8 — with what I send you you’ll have to try to make an exchange with Seurat as well. You’re well aware that if Tersteeg joins you in this venture, the two of you will easily be able to persuade Boussod Valadon to extend substantial credit for the purchases needed. But it’s urgent, because without that other dealers will cut the ground from under your feet. I’ve made the acquaintance of a Danish artist10 who talks about Heyerdahl and other people from the north, Krøyer, &c. What he does is dry but very conscientious, and he’s still young. Saw the exhibition of the Impressionists in rue Laffitte11 at the time. He’ll probably come to Paris for the Salon, and wants to tour Holland to see the museums.
   I think it’s a very good idea that you put the books in the Independents’ too. This study should be given the title: ‘Parisian novels’. I’d be so happy to know you’d succeeded in persuading Tersteeg — well, patience. I was obliged to buy supplies for 50 francs when your letter arrived. This week I’ll start work on 4 or 5 things. I think about this association of artists every day, and the plan has developed further in my mind, but Tersteeg would have to be involved, and a lot depends on that. Nowadays, the artists would probably allow themselves to be persuaded by us, but we can’t go ahead before we have Tersteeg’s help. Without that we’d be on our own, listening to everybody moaning from morning till night, and each of them individually would be constantly coming to ask for explanations — axioms — &c. Shouldn’t be surprised if Tersteeg took the view that we can’t do without the Grand Boulevard artists — and if he advised you to persuade them to take the initiative in an association by giving paintings that would become common property and cease to belong to them individually. It seems to me that the Petit Boulevard would be morally obliged to join in response to a proposal from that side. And those Grand Boulevard gentlemen will only retain their current prestige by forestalling the partly justified criticism of the minor Impressionists, who’ll say: ‘you’re putting everything in your pocket’. They can easily reply to that: not at all, on the contrary, we’re the first to say: our paintings belong to the artists. If Degas, Monet, Renoir and Pissarro say that — even leaving plenty of room for their individual ideas about putting it into practice — they could — say worse, unless — they say nothing and let things ride. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I thank you very much for your letter, which I hadn’t even dared to expect so soon as regards the 50-franc note you included with it. I see you’ve had no response yet from Tersteeg — I don’t see the need to press the point from our end in a new letter — however, if you had some official business to transact with the firm of Boussod Valadon & Cie in The Hague you could make it clear in a P.S. that you’re quite surprised that he hasn’t let you know that he received the letter in question. As far as work goes, I brought home a no. canvas today, it’s a drawbridge, with a little carriage going across it, outlined against a blue sky — the river blue as well, the banks orange with greenery, a group of washerwomen wearing blouses and multicoloured bonnets. And another landscape with a little rustic bridge and washerwomen as well. Lastly an avenue of plane trees near the station. 12 studies altogether since I’ve been here. The weather’s changeable, often windy and cloudy skies — but the almond trees are starting to blossom everywhere. All in all I’m very pleased that the paintings are at the Independents.
   You’ll do well to go and see Signac at his place. I was very pleased at what you wrote in today’s letter, that he made a better impression on you than the first time. In any case I’m happy to know that from today you won’t be on your own in the apartment. Be sure to say hello to Koning for me. Is your health good? As far as mine goes, it’s better, but eating’s a real chore as I have a fever and no appetite, but it’s just a passing thing and a question of patience. I have company in the evening, because the young Danish painter who’s here is very nice; his work is dry, correct and timid, but I’m not averse to that when the person is young and intelligent. At one time he’d begun to study medicine, he knows the works of Zola, De Goncourt and Guy de Maupassant, and he has enough money to have an easy time of it. Besides that he has a very serious wish to do something different from what he’s doing at present. I think he’d do well to put off returning home for a year, or to come back after a short visit to his compatriots. But, my dear brother — you know, I feel I’m in Japan. I say no more than that, and again, I’ve seen nothing yet in its usual splendour. 
   That’s why (even while being worried that at the moment expenses are steep and the paintings of no value), that’s why I don’t despair of success in this enterprise of going on a long journey in the south. Here I’m seeing new things, I’m learning, and being treated with a bit of gentleness, my body isn’t refusing me its services. For many reasons I’d like to be able to create a pied-à-terre which, when people were exhausted, could be used to provide a rest in the country for poor Paris cab-horses like yourself and several of our friends, the poor Impressionists. I attended the inquiry into a crime committed at the door of a brothel here; two Italians killed two Zouaves. I took advantage of the opportunity to go into one of the brothels in the little street called ‘des Récollets’. Which is the limit of my amorous exploits vis-à-vis the Arlésiennes. The crowd almost (the southerner, following Tartarin’s example, being braver in good intentions than in action), the crowd, I’m telling you, almost lynched the murderers locked up in the town hall, but its revenge was that all the Italians, men and women, including the young chimney-sweeps, had to leave the town under duress.
   I wouldn’t talk to you about that if it weren’t to tell you that I’ve seen the boulevards of this town full of excited people. And really, that was quite beautiful. I made my last three studies with the help of the perspective frame you know about. I attach importance to the use of the frame, because it doesn’t seem unlikely to me that several artists will use it in the not too distant future, just as the old German and Italian painters, certainly, and, I’m inclined to believe, the Flemish artists too, used it. The modern use of this tool may differ from the use people made of it in the past — but — isn’t it also true that with the process of painting in oils we nowadays achieve very different effects from those of the inventors of the process, J. and Hubert van Eyck? This is to say that I still hope not to work for myself alone. I believe in the absolute necessity of a new art of colour, of drawing and — of the artistic life. And if we work in that faith, it seems to me that there’s a chance that our hopes won’t be in vain. You’ll still know that I’m in a position to send you some studies if need be, only it’s still impossible to roll them up. I shake your hand firmly. On Sunday I’ll write to Bernard and Lautrec because I solemnly promised to. Anyway, I’ll send you the letters. I’m really sorry about Gauguin’s situation, especially since, now that his health has been undermined, he no longer has a constitution that could only benefit from being put to the test, on the contrary, it will just wear him out now, and that will surely make it difficult for him to work. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Here’s a short note for Bernard and Lautrec, to whom I’d solemnly promised to write. I’m sending it to you so that you can give it to them sometime, it’s not in the least urgent and it will be a reason for you to see what they’re doing and to hear what they’re saying, if you want. But what’s Tersteeg doing? Nothing? If you haven’t had a reply, I’d drop him a line if I were you, very short and very calm, but stating that you’re astonished that he hasn’t replied to you. I say ‘personally’, because even though he doesn’t reply to me — to you — HE MUST reply, and you must insist on getting a reply. If you don’t, you’ll lose your self-confidence, and on the contrary, this is an excellent opportunity to gain more. I don’t believe we should press the point in a new letter explaining things again. We have to be careful with him — but what we have to avoid is to let ourselves be treated as if we were dead or outlaws. Enough. Let’s hope that you’ve received his reply in the meantime. I’ve had a line from Gauguin, who complains about the bad weather, is still unwell and says nothing vexes him more than lack of money among the variety of human ills, and yet he feels doomed to be broke for ever. 
   Rain and wind these past few days, I’ve worked at home on the study of which I’ve made a croquis in Bernard’s letter. My aim was to give it colours like stained glass, and a design of solid outlines. Am reading Pierre et Jean by Guy de Maupassant. It’s beautiful — have you read the preface explaining the freedom the artist has to exaggerate, to create in a novel a more beautiful, simpler, more consoling nature, and explaining what Flaubert’s phrase might have meant, ‘talent is long patience’ — and originality an effort of will and intense observation? There’s a Gothic porch here that I’m beginning to think is admirable, the porch of St Trophime, but it’s so cruel, so monstrous, like a Chinese nightmare, that even this beautiful monument in so grand a style seems to me to belong to another world, to which I’m as glad not to belong as to the glorious world of Nero the Roman. Must I tell the truth and add that the Zouaves, the brothels, the adorable little Arlésiennes going off to make their first communion, the priest in his surplice who looks like a dangerous rhinoceros, the absinthe drinkers, also seem to me like creatures from another world? 
   This doesn’t mean I’d feel at home in an artistic world, but it means I prefer to make fun of myself than to feel lonely. And I think I’d feel sad if I didn’t see the funny side of everything. You’ve had plenty of snow in Paris, from what our friend L’Intransigeant tells us. However, it’s not a bad idea for a journalist to advise General Boulanger to put the secret police off the scent by henceforth wearing rose-tinted spectacles, which in his opinion would go better with the General’s beard. Perhaps this will have the favourable influence we’ve been wanting for so long — on the picture trade. But nevertheless we’re going to see something of what there is in this famous Mr Tersteeg. He’ll have to come to a decision — really — in the interests of our pals we are, it seems to me, under some obligation not to let ourselves be thought of as dead men. It’s not about us but it’s about the question of the Impressionists in general, so as he has been approached by us, we must have his reply. You must feel like me that we can’t move forward without having 
   positive information about his intentions. If we think it’s a good idea to create a permanent exhibition of the Impressionists in London and Marseille, it goes without saying that we’ll try to establish them. So it remains to be seen, will Tersteeg be part of it? Yes or no?  And if not, what are his intentions as regards an offensive, do they exist, yes or no? And has he calculated, like us, the effect of a fall on paintings that are highly priced at present, a fall which, it seems to me, will probably come about as soon as the Impressionists rise. Look at the way those who sell highly priced paintings are harming themselves by opposing, for political reasons, the advent of a school that for years has shown an energy and a perseverance worthy of Millet, Daubigny and others. But let me know if Tersteeg has written to you and what he may have said. I’ll do nothing about this without you. Good luck and a handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Included with the other letters the one from Gauguin, so that you can read them. My dear Theo, Your letter gave me great pleasure, I thank you for it as well as for the 50-franc note. I congratulate you heartily on Tersteeg’s letter — I think it’s absolutely satisfactory. I’m convinced there’s nothing hurtful in his silence towards me, in any case he’d have expected you to give me his reply to read. And it’s much more practical for him having only to write to you, and as far as I’m concerned, if he doesn’t think what I’m doing is utterly bad, you’ll see, he’ll write me a line as soon as he’s seen my work. So once again, I’m happier with his simple and friendly reply than I could tell you. You’ll have noticed that he states his willingness to make a purchase of a good quality Monticelli for his own collection. If you told him that we have a bouquet of flowers in our collection that is more artistic and more beautiful than a bouquet by Diaz. That Monticelli would sometimes take a bouquet of flowers in order to put on a single panel the whole range of his richest and most perfectly balanced tones. And that you have to go straight to Delacroix to find such an orchestration of colours.
   That — I’m referring to the painting at the Delarebeyrettes’3 — we currently know of another bouquet of very good quality and at a reasonable price, and that in any case we think it’s much finer than the Monticellis with figures, which are all over the place these days and belong to a period of decline in Monticelli’s talent. I hope you’ll send him Gauguin’s fine seascape. But how pleased I am that Tersteeg has replied in this way. When you write to him, say a word about Russell. When I write to Russell myself, I’ll talk about his paintings and I’ll ask him to do an exchange with me, because we’d want to mention him and show his paintings when it comes to the question of the modern-day Renaissance school. I’ve just done a clump of apricot trees in a little fresh green orchard. Had some trouble with the sunset with figures and a bridge that I was talking to Bernard about. As the bad weather prevented me from working on the spot, I completely worked this study to death trying to finish it at home. 
   However, I started the same subject again immediately afterwards on another canvas, but as the weather was quite different, in a grey palette and without figures. I wouldn’t think it a bad idea if you sent Tersteeg one of my studies — do you mean the Clichy bridge with the yellow sky and two houses reflected in the water?   That one, or the butterflies10 or the field of poppies11 might do. However, I hope to do better things here. If you happen to feel that way, you could tell Tersteeg that I myself think I have a better chance of sales in Holland with the studies of nature in the south, and that when Tersteeg comes to Paris in May he’ll find a consignment with some subjects from down here. And again, many thanks for all the initiatives you’ve taken for the Independents’ exhibition, all in all I’m really pleased that they’ve put them with the other Impressionists. But — although this time it makes no difference at all — in future my name must be put in the catalogue the way I sign it on the canvases, i.e. Vincent and not Vangogh, for the excellent reason that people here wouldn’t be able to pronounce that name.
   I’m returning herewith the letter from Tersteeg and the one from Russell — it will perhaps be interesting to keep the artists’ correspondence. If you included the little head of a Breton woman by our friend Bernard in your consignment, that wouldn’t be a bad idea. We must show him that all the Impressionists are good and that what they do is very varied. I think our friend Reid regrets falling out, unfortunately there can be no question of offering him the same advantages again — that is, trying to let him have paintings on commission. It’s not enough to love paintings, and it seemed to me that he lacked warm feelings for painters. If he changes in that respect it won’t be overnight. Tersteeg was a personal friend of Mauve and many others, and he has that je ne sais quoi that wins art lovers over. You’ll see that what gives self-confidence is knowing people. I’ll write more in the next few days, but wanted to congratulate you right away on the renewal of your relations with Holland. Handshake. Yours truly, Vincent The city of Paris pays practically nothing, would be sorry to see the Seurats in a provincial museum or a cellar — these paintings must stay in living hands. If Tersteeg was willing — — —. If we do the 3 permanent exhibitions, we’d need a large Seurat19 for Paris, one for London and one for Marseille. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and for the 50-franc note enclosed in it. I would have things to write to you at leisure but have to do so in great haste. First of all, Tersteeg once again. Am very pleased that your consignment goes off on Monday and after all, perhaps also because there’s a canvas of mine in it. However, that one doesn’t count, because I hope you’ll think what I’ve just done is good and that it will mean a new canvas of mine goes off to Holland. I’d worked on a no. 20 canvas in the open air in an orchard — ploughed lilac field, a reed fence — two pink peach trees against a glorious blue and white sky. Probably the best landscape I’ve done. Just as I brought it home I received from our sister a piece in Dutch dedicated to Mauve’s memory, with his portrait (really good, the portrait), the text poor and saying nothing — pretty etching. But something or other grabbed hold of me and made my throat tight 
   with emotion, and I wrote on my painting Souvenir de Mauve Vincent & Theo4 and if you think it’s good as it stands we’ll send it to Mrs Mauve in both our names. I deliberately took the best study I’ve made here, I don’t know what they’ll say about it back home, but that’s neither here nor there to us. It seemed to me that in memory of Mauve we needed something that was both tender and very cheerful and not a study in a more serious key than that.  ‘Don’t believe that the dead are dead. While there are people still alive  The dead will live, the dead will live’. That’s how I feel the thing, no sadder than that. In addition to that I now have another 4 or 5 studies of orchards6 and I’m going to start a no. 30 canvas of the same subject.
   This zinc white that I’m using now doesn’t dry. If everything was dry I’d send a consignment at once. Only the days are all good now, not in terms of the weather, on the contrary, there are 3 windy days for one still one, but as for the subjects of orchards in blossom. I have a lot of trouble painting because of the wind, but I fix my easel to pegs stuck in the ground8 and work anyway, it’s too beautiful. Now be steadfast in keeping up relations with Tersteeg. Success or not, in a year I’m inclined to believe it will be there. It seems to me that Tersteeg and not Reid should now set up the Impressionist exhibition in England. I don’t at all like Reid’s way of behaving towards us, it seems funny to me that you and Guillaumin haven’t already arranged to cancel the sale of the painting 
   in question. You can tell Guillaumin boldly from me that that’s my firm opinion, and as much in the interests of G. himself as in the interests of business in general. The price was already derisory. Either Reid, after what has happened, should buy outright, or the artists should shut the door in his face. That’s how I’ve seen it in the past, and on further reflection I still see it like that. For 300 francs we’re compromising further sales, but it’s very sad. Is there any way for you to buy it for us, the painting in question? Tersteeg should know all about the Reid business, and know he has a competitor in the England business and that we’d prefer him to be the one who does it. Anyway, that’s not my affair, it’s that of the firm of Boussod Valadon, to which you belong, you and Tersteeg. In great haste. Ever yours, Vincent Warm regards to Koning, and till tomorrow I hope, if I have time to write. My dear Theo, I’m in a fury of work as the trees are in blossom and I wanted to do a Provence orchard of tremendous gaiety — writing to you in a calm frame of mind presents serious difficulties, yesterday I wrote some letters that I later destroyed. I continue every day to feel that we’re obliged to do something in Holland — that we need to launch it with all the fervour of the sansculottes, with a French gaiety worthy of the cause we’re pleading.  So here’s a plan of attack that will cost us some of the best paintings we’ve made together, definitely worth let’s say a pundle off tousand-vrenc pills, well anyway they’ll have cost us money and a good slice out of our lives. But it would be a loud and clear reply to certain muffled insinuations treating us more or less as if we were already dead, and a revenge for your trip last year when the welcome they gave you was lacking in warmth &c. Enough. Let’s suppose, then, that first of all we gave Jet Mauve the Souvenir de Mauve. 
   Let’s suppose I dedicate a study to Breitner (I have one exactly like the study I exchanged with L. Pissarro5 and Reid’s one, oranges, foreground white, background blue). Let’s suppose we also gave our sister some study or other. Let’s suppose we gave the modern museum in The Hague, since we have so many memories in The Hague, the 2 Montmartre landscapes exhibited at the Independents’. There’s one more thing that’s not at all easy. With Tersteeg having written to you ‘send me some Impressionists, but only paintings you yourself think are among the best’, and you having for your part included one of my paintings in this consignment, I’m in the uncomfortable position of convincing Tersteeg I really am an Impressionist of the Petit Boulevard11 and that I expect to retain that position. Ah well, he’ll have one of my paintings in his own collection — I’ve been thinking about it these past few days and I’ve found a funny thing of a kind I’m not going to do every day. 
   It’s the drawbridge with a little yellow carriage and group of washerwomen, a study in which the fields are a bright orange, the grass very green, the sky and the water blue. It just needs a frame designed specially for it, in royal blue and gold like this, the flat part blue, the outer  strip gold. If necessary, the frame can be of blue plush, but it would be better to paint it. I think I can assure you that what I’m making here is better than my campaign in Asnières last spring. Nothing is absolutely decided in the whole plan except for the dedication in memory of Mauve and the dedication to Tersteeg. I haven’t yet managed to get a line written to tell him, but I’ll manage it, as the painting’s done it’ll come to me all by itself, but you’re well aware that we have the power in us to oblige them to talk about us if it so pleases us, and we can carry on the work of introducing the Impressionists there with the greatest calmness and self-assurance. If you see Reid again it would be a good idea to tell him we don’t have much confidence in the success of ambitious people and that we prefer to do good work, that we were surprised at his ways of behaving, which in the end were inexplicable, and that since then we no longer know what to think of him. I think Russell
   is trying to make peace between Reid and me, and that he wrote the letter precisely with that in mind. I’ll certainly write to Russell saying I told Reid bluntly that I was sure it was a mistake on his part and crazy to like paintings that are dead and to have no regard for living artists. That in any case I hoped to see him change in that respect. As soon as I received the letter I had to spend almost everything on colours and canvases, and I’d be very pleased if it were possible for you to send me something extra in the next few days. The painting of the garden with lovers is at the Théâtre Libre. Boyer, the framer, still has a lithograph, the old man with a bald head. I’d like you to get the consignment that I’m going to make for you before Tersteeg arrives in Paris, and you can put the apple trees in blossom19 in the room. I’m really glad it’s going well with Koning and that you aren’t living alone. What a bad business with Vignon, no doubt Mr Gendre was involved, I wish Mr Gendre nothing but ill, he does too much of it to other people. It’s a sad end for père Martin. I still can’t manage a letter to you of the kind I’d like, work is absorbing me completely. Well, first and foremost it’s to tell you I’d like to do some studies intended for Holland, and after that leave Holland alone for ever. Thinking of Mauve, J.H. Weissenbruch, Tersteeg, our mother and Wil, in the past few days, I’ve felt more emotion than perhaps reasonable, and it calms me down to say to myself that we’ll do some paintings for there. And after that I’ll forget them and I’ll probably think only about the Petit Boulevard. Rest assured that Tersteeg won’t refuse the painting, and that it’s a firm decision that that one and the one for Jet Mauve will go to Holland. For my part I won’t write to Tersteeg direct, if I say something to him I’ll send the letter to you with the painting. My dear Theo, Am obliged to write to you as I’m sending you an order for colours which, if you place it with Tasset & Lhote, rue Fontaine, you’ll do well — since they know me — to tell them that I expect a discount at least equivalent to the cost of carriage, which I’ll be glad to pay myself — they don’t have to cover carriage, we’ll pay it, but in that case the discount should be 20%. If they’re willing to give you it — as I’m inclined to believe — they can supply me until further notice, and so this is a big order for them. 
   You’ll ask —  please — père Tasset or père Lhote the lowest price for 10 metres of his primed or absorbent canvas — and you’ll let me know the outcome of the discussion you’ll probably have with that gentleman for delivery of the merchandise described above. Here’s the order: 


20
 
Silver white large tubes


10
 
ditto zinc white


15
 
Veronese Green 
double tubes


10
 
lemon Chrome Yellow 
ditto


10
 
(No. two) Chrome Yellow 
ditto


3
 
Vermilion 
ditto


3
 
No. three Chrome Yellow,
ditto


6
 
Geranium 
lake 
small 
tubes

freshly ground,
if they’re greasy
I’ll send them back.


12
 
ordinary
,, 
,,
,,


2
 
Carmine
 
,,
,,


4
 
Prussian Blue 
small tubes


4
 
very light cinnabar GREEN 
small tubes


2
 
orange lead 
small tubes


6
 
Emerald green 
small tubes


 
   This is quite a sizeable order; however, without counting the difference between the discount I dare hope for and the cost of carriage, we’ll still earn what I pay in addition for carriage, without taking into account that I don’t get any discount here. Attached, so that it won’t put too much of a burden on you, a smaller order to be deducted from the first one, which latter is only urgent in respect of the part mentioned below. 


Urgent


10
 
Silver whit elarge tubes


6
 
Veronese Green double tubes


3
 
Lemon  
chrome 
yellow

 


3
 
 No 2
,,
,,
 double tubes


1
 
No 3
,,
,,
 




1
 
Vermilion, double tube


3
 
Geranium lake, small tubes


6
 
Ordinary lake
,, 
  ,,


2
 
Prussian blue
,, 
  ,,


4
 
Emerald green
,, 
  ,,


 And — as soon as possible — the final price, to me, of absorbent canvas, 10 metres, please. The colourman here3 made absorbent canvas for me, but he’s so lazy about doing it that I’ve decided to have everything sent from Paris or Marseille, and give up — having lost all patience — the idea of getting him to do it. (While waiting for a no. 30 absorbent canvas I painted two on non-absorbent canvas.)4 It goes without saying that if you buy colours for me my expenses here will be reduced by over 50%. Up to now I’ve spent more on my colours, canvases, &c. than on myself. I have another new orchard for you — but for Christ’s sake get the paint to me without delay. The season of orchards in blossom is so short, and you know these subjects are among the ones that cheer everyone up. As soon as I can pay for crates and postage (which is probably cheaper at the little station here than it would be at the Gare de Lyon)5 I’ll send you the studies. Am without a sou for the moment, as I was telling you before. Do what you can, but in any case let’s get the discount on the colours if, that is, you think it’s to our advantage to work like beavers. Ever yours, Vincent Herewith an order direct to Tasset & Lhote. I’m quite curious to know what you’ll say about my first consignment, which will definitely contain at least 10 canvases. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. I’ve sent you croquis of the paintings intended for Holland. Goes without saying that the painted studies are more brilliant in colour. Am hard at work again, still orchards in blossom.  The air here is definitely doing me good, I could wish you deep lungfuls of it. One of its effects is quite funny, one small glass of cognac goes to my head down here, so without having recourse to stimulants to get my blood circulating, my constitution won’t be taxed so much all the same. But I’ve had a terribly weak stomach since I’ve been here, well, that’s probably a matter of a lot of patience. I hope to make real progress this year, which I really need to do too. I’ve got a new orchard that’s as good as the pink peach trees -– some very pale pink apricot trees. At present I’m working on some yellow-white plum trees with thousands of black branches. I’m using vast quantities of canvases and colours but all the same I hope not to waste money. 
   Out of 4 canvases perhaps there’ll scarcely be one that would make a painting like Tersteeg’s or Mauve’s, but we’ll be able to use the studies for exchanges, I hope. When will I be able to send you something? I’d so much like to do two of Tersteeg’s, because it’s better than the Asnières studies. Yesterday I saw a bullfight where five men were working the ox with banderillas and rosettes. A toreador crushed one of his balls jumping over the barrier. He was a blond man with grey eyes and a lot of sang-froid, they said he’d feel it for a long time. He was dressed in sky-blue and gold, just like the little horseman in our Monticelli with the 3 figures in a wood. The bullring looks so beautiful when there’s sunshine and a crowd. Bravo for Pissarro, he’s right, I think. I hope he’ll do an exchange with us one day. The same for Seurat, it would be a good thing to have a painted study by him.
   Anyway, I’m working hard, hoping we’ll be able to do things of this kind. The month will be hard for you and me, but nevertheless, if you can manage it, it’s to our advantage to do as many orchards in blossom as we can. I’m now well under way and I need 10 more, I think, same subject. You know I’m changeable in my work, and this rage to paint orchards won’t last for ever. After that it may be bullrings. And I have an ENORMOUS amount of drawing to do, because I’d like to do drawings in the style of Japanese prints. I can’t do anything but strike while the iron’s hot. Will be worn out after the orchards, because they’re no. 25 and 30 and 20 canvases. We wouldn’t have too many if I could knock off twice the number. Because I believe that could perhaps melt the ice in Holland once and for all. Mauve’s death was a rude shock for me. You’ll easily see that the pink peach trees were painted with a certain passion. 
   I also need a starry night with Cypresses or — perhaps above a field of ripe wheat, there are some really beautiful nights here. I have a constant fever for work. Am quite curious to know what the results will be after a year, I hope by then I’ll be less troubled by fits of faintness. At the moment I suffer a lot some days, but that doesn’t worry me in the least because it’s nothing but the reaction to this past winter, which wasn’t normal. And the blood’s restoring itself, that’s the main thing. We must reach the point where my paintings are worth what I spend and even exceed that, seeing that so much has been spent already. Ah well, we’ll get there. Not everything I do is a success, of course, but the work’s getting along. Up to now you haven’t complained about what I spend here, but let me warn you that if I continue my work at the same rate I’ll find it hard to manage. But the work’s excessive. If a month or a fortnight comes when you feel hard up let me know — then I’ll turn my hand to doing drawings and that will cost us less. This is to tell you that you shouldn’t force yourself for no reason — there’s so much to do here, all sorts of studies, that it’s not the same as in Paris, where you can’t sit down wherever you please.
   If it’s possible to manage a bit of a steep month, so much the better, because orchards in blossom are subjects we have a chance of selling or exchanging. But I thought about the fact that you’ll have the rent to pay, and that’s why you must let me know if you’re too hard up. I’m still going about with the Danish painter, but he’s going home soon. He’s an intelligent boy, and fine as far as loyalty and manners go, but his painting is still very poor. You’ll probably see him when he passes through Paris. It was kind of you to go and see Bernard. If he does his service in Algeria, who knows, perhaps I’ll go and keep him company. Has winter come to an end in Paris at long last? 
   I think what Kahn says is quite true, that I haven’t paid enough attention to values, but it’ll be quite another thing they’ll say later — and no less true. It’s not possible to do both values and colour. Théodore Rousseau has done it better than anyone else, by mixing his colours the darkness caused by time has increased, and now his paintings are hardly recognizable. You can’t be at the pole and the equator at the same time. You have to choose. And I have high hopes of doing that, too, and it will probably be colour. More soon, handshake from me to you, to Koning and to the pals. Vincent My dear Theo, It’s awfully good of you to have sent me the complete order of colours, I’ve just received them but haven’t yet had the time to check them. I’m so pleased about it. Today has been a good day too. This morning I worked on an orchard of plum trees in blossom2 — suddenly a tremendous wind began to blow, an effect I’d only ever seen here — and came back again at intervals. In the intervals, sunshine that made all the little white flowers sparkle. It was so beautiful! My friend the Dane3 came to join me, and at risk and peril every moment of seeing the whole lot of it on the ground I carried on painting — in this white effect there’s a lot of yellow with blue and lilac, the sky is white and blue. But as for the execution of what we do out of doors like this, what will they say? Well, let’s wait and see. 
   So, after supper I started on the same painting I intend for Tersteeg, ‘The Langlois bridge’, for you. And I’d really like to make a repetition of that one for Jet Mauve too, because since I’m spending so much we mustn’t lose sight of the fact that we’ve got to try to get some back, of this money that’s quickly slipping away. Afterwards I was sorry I hadn’t asked for the colours from père Tanguy anyway, although there isn’t the least advantage in that — on the contrary — but he’s such a funny fellow and I still think of him often. Don’t forget to say hello to him for me if you see him, and tell him that if he’d like any paintings for his shop window he can have some from here, and the best. Ah, it seems to me more and more that people are the root of everything, and although it remains for ever a melancholy feeling not to find oneself in real life, in the sense that it would be better to work in 
   flesh itself than colour or plaster, in the sense that it would be better to make children than to make paintings or to do business, at the same time you feel you’re living when you consider that you have friends among those who themselves aren’t in real life either. But precisely because what’s in people’s hearts is also the heart of business, we have to conquer friendships in Holland, or rather, revive them. All the more so since, as far as the cause of Impressionism goes, we have little to fear at the moment of not winning through. And it’s because of this victory that’s almost guaranteed in advance that for our part we have to have good manners and do everything calmly. I would really like to have seen the embodiment of Marat you spoke about the other day. That would certainly interest me very much. Unwittingly, I imagine Marat as the — moral — equivalent (but more powerful) of Xanthippe8 — the woman whose love turned sour. Who nevertheless is still touching — but in the end it’s not as jolly as Guy de Maupassant’s La Maison Tellier.
   Has De Lautrec finished his painting of a woman leaning on a little café table? If I manage to learn how to work up the studies I’ve done from life on another canvas, we’d gain in terms of possible sales. I hope to succeed in doing it here — and that’s why I’m making a trial effort with the two paintings that will go to Holland, and on the other hand, you’ll have them too, and in this way there’s nothing reckless. You were right to tell Tasset that the geranium lake should be included after all, he sent it, I’ve just checked — all the colours that Impressionism has made fashionable are unstable, all the more reason boldly to use them too raw, time will only soften them too much. So the whole order I made up, in other words the 3 chromes (the orange, the yellow, the lemon), the Prussian blue, the emerald, the madder lakes, the Veronese green, the orange lead, all of that is hardly found in the Dutch palette, Maris, Mauve and Israëls. But it’s found in that of Delacroix, who had a passion for the two colours most disapproved of, and for the best of reasons, lemon and Prussian blue. All the same, I think he did superb things with them, blues and lemon yellows. Handshake to you, to Koning and once again many thanks for the colours. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter containing the samples of absorbent canvas. Will be very glad to receive — but it’s not at all urgent — 3 metres of the sort at 6 francs. As for his consignment of colours, there were only 4 large tubes of white in it, while all the other tubes were half-size (of white). If he has charged for them in the same proportions, that’s very good, but pay attention to that. 4 tubes of white at 1 franc, but the rest should only be half the price. I find his Prussian blue poor, and his cinnabar. The rest is good. Now I’ll tell you that I’m working on the 2 paintings of which I wanted to make repetitions. The pink peach tree is giving me the most trouble.  
   You can see from the four squares on the other side4 that the three orchards5 go together, more or less. I now also have a small pear tree, vertical, also flanked by two other horizontal canvases. That will make 6 canvases of orchards in blossom. At the moment I’m trying to finish them a little every day, and to make them go together. I dare hope for 3 more, also going together, but those are still only in the state of embryos or foetuses. I’d really like to do this group of 9 canvases. You understand that we’re free to consider the 9 canvases as the initial idea for a much larger, definitive decoration (this one consists of no. 25 and no. 12 canvases), which would be done after exactly the same subjects, at the same time next year. 
    Here’s the other middle piece of the no. 12 canvases. The ground purple — in the background a wall, with straight poplars — and a very blue sky. The small pear tree has a purple trunk and white flowers, a large yellow butterfly on one of the clumps. On the left, in the corner, a little garden with a border of yellow reeds and green bushes and a flowerbed. A small pink house. So there are the details of the decoration of orchards in blossom, which I was intending for you. But the last 3 canvases exist only in a provisional state, and are supposed to represent a very large orchard with a border of cypresses and large pear trees and apple trees. The ‘Pont de Langlois’ for you10 is going well, and will be better than the study, I think. Am in a real hurry to get back to work. As for the Guillaumin, if it’s possible, it’s certainly a good deal to buy it. But since they’re talking about a new method for fixing pastel, would perhaps be wise to ask him to fix it in this way, in case of purchase. Handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’ve had a letter from Bernard with some sonnets that he’s made, some of which are successful; he’ll succeed in making a good sonnet, for which I almost envy him. As soon as the Langlois bridge and the repetition of the other painting (the pink peach tree) are dry, will make a consignment. My dear Theo, Thanks for today’s letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. About the previous letter containing 50 francs, I received it as well, and I also wrote telling you that the day before or two days before I sent the two drawings. These drawings are done with a reed cut the same way as you’d cut a goose quill. I plan to do a series like that. And I hope to do better than the first two. It’s a process I already tried in Holland in the past, but I didn’t have as good reeds there as here. Have had a letter from Koning for which please thank him — I’ll be very glad to exchange the two drawings with him for a study of his that you will choose and keep in the collection. I’ll write to him to explain the process to him, and will send him some cut reeds so that he can make some too. Now that was an important piece of news about your trip to Brussels.
   You’ll be in a position to judge how the old and highly priced merchandise is doing over there. But what a business. Because it’s indeed likely that those gentlemen are up to something. Do you remember, we had a chat about it before I left, that with the World Exhibition coming, Bouguereau, Lefebvre, Benjamin C., the whole clique would go to Boussod to grumble and to insist on their determination that the house of B. (the world’s leader) remain pure and faithful to the principles of the art that is truly the most civilized and the most agreeable, namely their own paintings. Be that as it may, it certainly gives you a hell of a lot to think about. And the situation would be serious if you were to fall out with those gentlemen. I won’t hide from you that it would be a rude shock for you, not immediately, but let’s say 6 months later, because of the change it would bring about in your life. 
   When a man comes out of prison after having spent a long time there, there are times when he even misses prison, because he feels disoriented once he’s at liberty, probably so called because the exhausting daily task of earning one’s living leaves one hardly any liberty. But you know all that. You’ll certainly regret some things without choosing to, even while you gain others. I have 10 orchards now, not counting three small studies and a large one of a cherry tree that I worked to death. When will you be back, and what to do about the definitive consignment? Because now I have to change subjects, the orchards having mostly lost their blossom. So these orchards with the Langlois bridge 8 form a first series. 
   If you prefer them to continue to dry here, that’s not bad perhaps. At the moment they’re on a covered terrace to dry. Tell me, isn’t Daumier on show at the Beaux-Arts, and Gavarni? Bravo as far as Daumier’s concerned, not the Beaux-Arts.  
   Croquis here of an orchard that I had especially intended for you to mark the first of May. It’s entirely bright and done entirely in one go, a riot of impastos barely tinged with yellow and lilac in the first white clump. You’ll probably be in Holland then, and over there you’ll perhaps see the same trees in blossom on that day. What a pity about Cor, let’s hope it’s nothing serious. I’m very pleased to hear you’ve taken lessons in eating from young Koning, he’s very clever at that, and it’s entertaining to eat with that young sprig of an artist. 
   I’m very glad you have his study of a negro woman. Well, anyway, it will do you good to eat breakfast. I’ve done the same thing here by the way, eating 2 eggs in the morning. My stomach’s very weak but I hope I can get it back to normal, it’ll take time and patience. In any case I’m in fact already much better than in Paris. Anyway, it seems you don’t exactly need a vast amount of food here, and on this occasion I also really wanted to tell you that I’m increasingly doubtful about the truth of the legend of Monticelli’s absorbing huge quantities of absinthe. When I think of his work it doesn’t seem possible to me that a man who’s jittery from drink could have done it. 
   Perhaps that woman from the Limousin, the Roquette lady, has after all put in a bit of her spiteful gossip to plant this legend. Well then, I’m writing to you in haste, that way you’ll have my letter before you leave if it’s this coming Sunday you plan to go. While I feel this visit won’t delight you so much if it’s mainly paintings from Delort & Co. that make up the collection intended for the virtuous Belgians, it doesn’t stop me saying that I wish you good health and bon voyage, and above all, good luck. I saw Bernard’s still life when he was working on it, and I thought it superb. Handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ll start by telling you that the letter you didn’t receive was wrongly addressed by me and as such came back to me. I had — in a moment of distraction — a classic case — addressed it rue de Laval instead of rue Lepic. That being so I’m repeating for you what was in the letter — what was new — the visit by Macknight, Russell’s friend, who came back last Sunday by the way. I must go to see him at home and see what he’s making, of which I’ve seen nothing so far. He’s a Yankee who probably does much better than the ordinary run of Yankees. But a Yankee all the same. Is that saying enough? When I’ve seen his paintings or drawings I’ll concede about the work. But about the man, still the same. The main point of this letter is to know if you’ve left, and how. And after — that — what comes after — you perhaps don’t know yourself. Anyway, it always seems that those Boussod Val. gentlemen don’t care in the least 
   for what the artists themselves will say about it. But I won’t hide from you that I thought the news was bad and that, I assure you, I’ve thought about it every day, quite in spite of myself. Because I daren’t continue with things that are going to cost you more than they’ll bring in at present. Because it’s something of a sign, all this conversation with those B&V gentlemen, that Impressionism isn’t catching on sufficiently. As for me, I immediately stopped doing paintings and I’ve carried on with a series of pen drawings of which you’ve had the first two, but in a smaller format. Because I said to myself that a falling-out with those gentlemen could make lower expenses on my part desirable for you. Not being so very attached to my paintings I’d leave them there without grumbling too much. 
   Not being, fortunately for me, one of those people whose only love in this world is paintings. On the contrary, believing that an artistic thing can be made at less cost than a painting requires — I’ve started a series of pen drawings. While waiting, I have some annoyances. I don’t now think that I’ll benefit from staying where I am, I’d rather take a room or two rooms, if need be, one to sleep in, one to work in. Because the people here, in order to make me pay pretty high rates for EVERYTHING, make too much of the fact that I take up a little more room with my paintings than their other customers who aren’t painters. For my part, I’ll make the point that I’m staying longer and spend more in the guest-house than labourers who just stay a short time. And they won’t get a sou out of me so easily any more. But — it’s always a really miserable thing dragging your equipment and paintings along behind you, and that makes coming in and going out more difficult. 
   Being forced, determined anyway, to move, do you want or rather do you think it more suitable, to go to Marseille now? I can do a series of seascapes there like the orchards in blossom series here. And I’ve also bought 3 strong cloth shirts and two pairs of sturdy shoes, with the idea of moving. In Marseille I would be more willing to try to obtain a showcase for the Impressionists, if you for your part would give me an assurance that you’d supply it, this showcase, with Impressionist paintings if people ask you to exhibit them. Which will be easy. I sometimes have serious anxieties that you, and I too, will be rooked again by those Boussod Valadon & Cie gentlemen, who give us a hard time. But I resist it. Don’t let yourself be rooked by them. Enough for today. So let me know your address in case you travel. When will you be in Holland? Still same address for me but would like to move, as I don’t feel comfortable here. Will send you pen drawings shortly, I already have 4 of them. Handshake. Vincent Will be very hard up end of month but should get by, only it’s being able to move right away that bothers me.  My dear Theo, Thank you very much for your letter and the 50-franc note it contained. It’s not in black that I see the future, but I see it bristling with many difficulties, and at times I wonder if these won’t be stronger than I am. This is especially so at times of physical weakness, and last week I suffered from a toothache that was so agonizing that it made me waste time quite in spite of myself. Nevertheless, I’ve just sent you a roll of small pen drawings, a dozen I think. That way you’ll see that even though I’d stopped painting I haven’t stopped working. Among them you’ll find a hasty croquis on yellow paper, a lawn in the public garden at the entrance to the town. And in the background a house more or less like this one.  Ah, well — today I rented the right-hand wing of this building, which contains 4 rooms, or more precisely, two, with two little rooms. It’s painted yellow outside, whitewashed inside — in the full sunshine. I’ve rented it for 15 francs a month.
   Now what I’d like to do would be to furnish a room, the one on the first floor, to be able to sleep there. The studio, the store, will remain here for the whole of the campaign here in the south, and that way I have my independence from petty squabbles over guest-houses, which are ruinous and depress me. In fact, Bernard writes me that he too has a whole house, but he has it for nothing. What luck. I’ll certainly make another drawing of it for you, better than the first croquis. And at this point I dare tell you that I intend to invite Bernard and some other people to send me canvases to show them here if the opportunity arises, and it will certainly arise in Marseille. I hope I’ve been lucky this time — you understand, yellow outside, white inside, right out in the sun, at last I’ll see my canvases in a really bright interior. The floor’s made of red bricks. And outside, the public garden, of which you’ll find two more drawings. The drawings, I dare assure you, will become even better. I’ve had a letter from Russell, who has bought a Guillaumin and 2 or 3 Bernards.
   I’m extremely pleased about that, he also writes that he’ll exchange studies with me. I wouldn’t be afraid of anything unless it was this bloody health. And yet I’m better than in Paris, and if my stomach has become terribly weak that’s a problem I picked up there, probably due mainly to the bad wine, of which I drank too much. Here the wine is just as bad, but I only drink very little of it. And so the fact is that as I hardly eat and hardly drink I’m very weak, but my blood is improving instead of being ruined. So once again, it’s patience I need in the circumstances, and perseverance. Having received the absorbent canvas, I’m starting these days a new no. 30 canvas that I hope will be better than the others. Do you remember in La recherche du bonheur the chap who bought as much land as he could run round in a single day? Well, with my orchard decoration I’ve been that man, more or less, half a dozen out of a dozen I have anyway, but the other 6 aren’t as good, and I’m sorry I didn’t rather do 2 of them instead of the last 6. Anyway, I’ll send you ten or so in the next few days anyway.
   I bought 2 pairs of shoes, which cost me 26 francs, and 3 shirts that cost me 27 francs, which meant that despite the 100 note I wasn’t enormously rich. But in view of the fact that I plan to do business in Marseille, I definitely want to be well turned out, and I don’t intend to buy anything but good quality. And the same for work, it will be better to do one painting fewer than to do it less well. Should it come about that you had to leave those gentlemen, don’t think that I have doubts about the possibility of doing business all the same, but we mustn’t be caught unawares, that’s all, and if it drags on a bit longer that’s actually for the better. As for me, if a few months from now I’m ready for an expedition to Marseille, I’ll be able to do things with more self-assurance than if I arrived there having run out of breath. I’ve seen Macknight again, but still nothing of his work. I still have colours, I have brushes, I still have plenty of things in stock. But we mustn’t waste our powder. I think if you were to leave those gentlemen, for my part I’d have to manage to live without spending more than, for example, 150 francs a month. I couldn’t do it now, but you’ll see that in 2 months I’ll be set up like that. If then we earn more, so much the better, but I want to ensure that. 
   So, if I had some very strong broth, that would get me going right away, it’s dreadful, I’ve never been able to get even any of the very simple things I’ve asked those people for. And it’s the same everywhere in these little restaurants. Yet it’s not hard to boil potatoes. Impossible. And no rice or macaroni either, or else it’s ruined with fat or they don’t do it, and make the excuse: it’s for tomorrow, there’s no room on the stove, &c. It’s silly but true all the same that that’s why my health is poor. All the same, it cost me a lot of agonizing to bring myself to make a decision, because I said to myself that in The Hague and in Nuenen I’d tried to take a studio and I said to myself that it had turned out badly. But many things have changed since then, and as I feel I’m on firmer ground — let’s go ahead. Only we’ve already spent so much money on this bloody painting we mustn’t forget that it has to come back in paintings. If we dare believe, and I’m sure of it, that Impressionist paintings will go up in value, we’ve got to do lots of them and keep the prices up. 
   All the more reason why we should calmly take care of the quality of the thing and not waste time. And after a few years, I can see the possibility that the capital laid out will come back into our hands, if not in cash, then in value. And now if you agree, I’ll rent or buy furniture for the bedroom. I’ll go and have a look today or tomorrow morning. I’m still convinced that nature here is just what’s needed to do colour. And so it’s more than likely that I won’t move far from here. Raffaëlli has done a portrait of Edmond de Goncourt, hasn’t he? That must be beautiful. I’ve seen Le Salon published by L’Illustration. Is the Jules Breton beautiful? You’ll soon receive a painting I did for you for the first of May. If necessary, I could live at the new studio with someone else, and I’d very much like to. Perhaps Gauguin will come to the south. Perhaps I’ll come to an arrangement with Macknight. Then we could cook at home. 
   In any case, the studio is too open to view for me to think it could tempt any woman, and it would be hard for a petticoat episode18 to lead to a cohabitation. Anyway, moral standards seem to me less inhuman and contrary to nature than in Paris. But with my temperament, to lead a wild life and to work are no longer compatible at all, and in the given circumstances I’ll have to content myself with making paintings. That’s not happiness and not real life, but what can you say, even this artistic life, which we know isn’t the real one, seems so alive to me, and it would be ungrateful not to be content with it. I have one big worry fewer now that I’ve found the little white studio. I looked at a whole lot of apartments without success. It will seem funny to you that the water closet is at the neighbour’s, in quite a large house that belongs to the same owner. In a southern town I think you’d be wrong to complain about it, because these facilities are few and far between, and dirty, and you can’t help thinking of them as nests of germs. On the other hand, I have water here. I’ll put some Japanese prints on the wall. 
   If there happened to be some canvases in your apartment that were in the way, this could always be used as a storeroom, that might become necessary, because you ought not to have mediocre things at your place. Bernard has written to me and sent croquis. I’m very pleased that you found our mother and sister well. Is Reid going to Marseille? At the bottom of it, perhaps, is that he loves this woman who didn’t trust us, feeling that we might perhaps not want to encourage the cohabitation. I’m inclined to believe she’s the psychological reason for his coming back. You’ll say that in that case we’ll have to consider everything he’s going to do in the future, and maintain great composure for the moment. Will you go back to Holland for the holidays? If you could do both, going to see Tersteeg and Marseille on business regarding the Impressionists, and resting at Breda between those two chores. Have you seen Seurat again? I shake your hand firmly, wishing you a year as full of sunshine as the weather here today. Warm regards to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent If you could send me 100 francs next time, I could sleep at the studio as early as this week. I’ll also write you what arrangement the furniture dealer wants to make. My dear Theo, Yesterday I went to visit some furniture dealers to see if I could rent a bed, &c. Unfortunately they do not rent, and even refused to sell on terms of paying so much per month. This is rather awkward. Now I’ve thought that perhaps — if Koning were to leave after seeing the Salon, as I believe was his original intention, after he left you could send me the bed he’s occupying now. We have to consider that if I sleep at the studio, that makes a difference after all of around 300 francs at the end of a year, which is otherwise spent at the hotel. I’m quite aware that it’s not possible to say in advance: I’ll stay here for such or such a length of time; however, I have many reasons to believe that a long stay here is likely. 
   Yesterday I was at Fontvieille, at Macknight’s — he had a good pastel — a pink tree — two watercolours under way, and I found him working on a head of an old woman in charcoal. He’s at the stage when the new colour theories are tormenting him, and while they prevent him from doing things according to the old system, he hasn’t sufficiently mastered his new palette to be able to succeed this way. He seemed very embarrassed to show them to me, so I had to go there specially and tell him I very much wanted to see his work, and now it’s not impossible that he may come to stay with me here for a while. Then we would benefit, I think, on both sides. I very often think of Renoir here and his pure, clean drawing. That’s just the way objects or figures are here, in the clear light. We have a tremendous amount of wind and mistral here, 3 days out of four at the moment, always with sunshine, though, but then it’s difficult to work out of doors. 
   I think something could be done here in the way of portraits. People may be crassly ignorant as far as painting goes, but in general they’re much more artistic than in the north in their own appearance and their own lives. I’ve seen figures here as lovely as those of Goya and Velázquez. They know how to stick a touch of pink on a black suit, or make a white, yellow, pink or green and pink, or blue and yellow outfit, in which nothing needs to be changed from the artistic point of view. Seurat would find some very picturesque figures of men here, despite their modern suits. Now I dare say these people here would jump at portraits. But, before daring to take the risk of throwing myself into that, I want my nervous system to calm down first, and then I want to be settled in such a way that we can receive people at the studio. And if I have to mention the big subject, by my calculations to be in good health and be acclimatized here once and for all 
   I’ll need a year, and to establish myself I’ll need a good thousand francs. If in the first year — the current one — I spent 100 francs to live and 100 francs for this establishment per month, you can see there wouldn’t be a sou left in this budget for painting. But by the end of this year I’m inclined to believe I’d have gained both my quite decent establishment and my health. And my occupation while waiting would above all be to spend every day drawing, with two or three paintings a month in addition. In — the establishment — I thus also count a complete renewal of all my linen and clothes and shoes. And I would be a different man by the end of the year. I’d have a home and I’d have my peace of mind about my health. 
   And so I can hope not to collapse out of breath before my time, here. Monticelli was physically more vigorous than I am, I think, and if I had the strength I would live like him, one day at a time. But if he became paralyzed, and without being that much of a drinker3 — all the more reason why I couldn’t withstand it. I was certainly well on the way to catching a paralysis when I left Paris. It caught up with me afterwards, right enough! When I stopped drinking, when I stopped smoking so much, when I started reflecting on things again instead of trying not to think — my God, what melancholias and what dejection. Working in this magnificent nature kept up my morale, but there too, after a certain amount of effort I didn’t have the strength. 
   Ah well, that’s why when I was writing to you the other day I said that if you left the Goupils you would probably feel better in terms of morale but the recovery would be very painful. While the sickness itself, you don’t feel it. My poor friend, our neurosis &c. surely also comes from our rather too artistic way of life — but it’s also a fatal inheritance, since in civilization we go on becoming weaker from generation to generation. Take our sister Wil, she has neither drunk nor led a wild life, and yet we know a photograph of her in which she has the look of a madwoman. Isn’t that proof enough that if we want to look the true state of our temperament in the face we have to range ourselves among those who suffer from a neurosis that goes back a good long way. 
   I think Gruby’s6 in the right in these cases: eat well, live well, see few women, in a word live in anticipation just as though one already had a brain disease and a disease of the marrow, not to mention neurosis, which really does exist. Certainly that’s taking the bull by the horns, which isn’t a bad policy. And Degas — does that and is successful. All the same, don’t you feel, as I do, it’s awfully hard? And in short doesn’t it do us a tremendous amount of good to listen to the wise advice of Rivet8 and Pangloss, those splendid optimists of the true and jovial Gallic race who leave you your self-esteem? Yet, if we want to live and work, we must be very careful and look after ourselves. Cold water, air, good simple food, wear the right clothes, sleep in a good bed and don’t have worries. And not letting yourself go with the women and real life to the extent you might like to. 
   I’m not set on sleeping at the studio but if I went to sleep there, it would be if I could see the possibility of establishing myself more or less for good and for a long period of time. Having no need at all now of space at the hotel, since I have the studio elsewhere, I’ll tell the people it’s 3 francs a day, take it or leave it. And consequently there’s nothing pressing. But if it’s all the same to you, send me 100 francs anyway next time, as I’d also like to have some drawers made, the way I had shirts and shoes made, and as I have to have almost all my clothes cleaned and mended. Then they’ll still be perfectly good. This is urgent, in case I’d have to go to Marseille or see people here. With all these precautions we’re taking now we can be more certain of being able to hold out in the long term and of putting our work in order. There are about ten canvases, for which I’m looking for a crate and which I’ll send you in the next few days. I shake your hand firmly, and Koning’s too. I had a postcard from Koning to say he’d received a letter to collect the paintings from the Independents. But of course he just had to collect them, what can I do about it? Ever yours, Vincent (It goes without saying that if at your home there were canvases that were taking up too much space you could send them here by goods train and I’d keep them in the studio here. If that isn’t yet the case it will be later, so I keep quite a few studies here that don’t seem good enough to me to be sent to you.) My dear Theo, I’m writing you another line to tell you that on reflection I think the best thing will be quite simply to take a mat and a mattress and make a bed in the studio on the floor. Because for the whole summer it’s going to be so hot it’ll be more than enough like that. Then in the winter we could see if we’ll need to take a bed, yes or no. About the bed you have at home, I think the arrangement of having a painter living with you is good for the painter and for you too, from the point of view of conversation and company. So even if Koning were to leave, there would perhaps be someone else who could replace him. So why don’t you keep the bed at home in any case? 
   It’s quite possible that as far as houses go I’ll find an even better one, either at Martigues, beside the sea, or in some other place. But the delightful thing about this studio is the gardens opposite. But there you are, as for doing repairs or furnishing it reasonably well, let’s wait — that will be wiser — all the more so since if we had to have cholera here in the summer, it could be that I’d up sticks and go to the country. It’s dirty, this town, with its old streets! As for the Arlésiennes they talk about so much, don’t they, do you know what I think of them, in short? Certainly, they’re truly charming, but it’s not what it must have been once. And there you are, it’s often more Mignard4 than Mantegna, since they’re in decline, 
   but be that as it may, it’s beautiful, really beautiful, and here I’m only talking about the Roman type — a bit boring and ordinary. But what exceptions! There are women like Fragonards and — like Renoir. And something you can’t fit into what’s already been done in painting! The best thing one could do, from all points of view, would be to paint portraits of women and children. But it seems to me that it won’t be I who does that, I don’t feel I’m enough of a Mr Bel-ami for that. But I’d be mightily pleased if that Bel-ami of the south — which Monticelli – wasn’t — but was preparing the ground — which I can feel in the air while at the same time feeling that it isn’t me — I’d be, I tell you — mightily pleased if in painting a man like Guy de Maupassant came along and cheerfully painted the beautiful people and things in these parts. 
   As for me, I’ll work, and here and there some of my work will last — but what Claude Monet is in landscape, the same thing in figure painting — who’s going to do that? Yet like me you must feel it’s in the air. Rodin? Rodin doesn’t do colour — it’s not him. But the painter of the future is a colourist such as there hasn’t been before. Manet prepared the ground, but you’re well aware that the Impressionists have already used stronger colour than Manet’s. This painter of the future, I can’t imagine him living in small restaurants, working with several false teeth and going into Zouave brothels like me. But it seems to me that I’m in the right when I feel it will come in a later generation and that in our case we have to do what our means allow us in that direction, without having doubts and without flinching. 
   Please let Guillaumin know that Russell wants to go and see him at home and intends to buy another painting from him. I’m writing to Russell today. I was hearing yesterday from Macknight and from the Dane that in Marseille there was never anything good in the dealers’ windows, and that they thought that nothing at all was being done there. I’m very keen to see something of that for myself, but for the very reason that I don’t want to get all worked up I’ll do it when my nerves are settled. In the letter I addressed wrongly, I was actually talking about Bonger. He probably dares say as much, since the Russians are having such success at the Theâtre Libre, &c. But that’s no reason, is it, to try to use that success to run the French down?
   I’ve just read Zola’s Au bonheur des dames again and I find it more and more beautiful. Now that’s news, that Reid’s back. I told Russell that since it was I who had introduced him into his home it was partly up to me to tell him why we’d fallen out. That Reid was ambitious, and being hard up for money like all of us, he was beside himself when it came to earning money. That I saw all that as involuntary acts (and him not responsible, therefore, and to be forgiven for these acts) of an over-excited nervous system. But that with Reid the vulgar dealer is stronger than the distinguished artist. 
   That won’t suit Reid, but is it too much to tell the truth? It’s surely no better than that now, and worse, in fact. Russell’s friend, Macknight, is a cold and not very nice character, too bad if I have both of them against me. However, I’ve said nothing about Macknight, although I imagine he has no more heart than Reid. If he found his painting style that would do him good, and it’s not impossible that it will come — he’s still young. 27, I think. Let’s assume then, if you think it’s right, that we won’t be in a hurry yet to put the studio in order. It’s already 
   good enough for the time being. And if I sleep there the way I’ve said above it won’t cost me anything. I save 30 francs at the hotel and pay 15 in rent, so there’s nothing but benefit in that. Handshake to you and to Koning. I have another drawing. Ever yours, Vincent I’ve seen a whole lot of crates for my consignment at the penny bazaar, I’ll go back to take measurements. Was the Degroux you speak of the same subject as the one in the museum in Brussels, the Saying grace? True what you say about De Braekeleer. Have you heard that he was suffering from a brain disease that’s supposed to have reduced him to helplessness???  I’ve heard that, but wasn’t it temporary? You mention the name of someone else, whom I don’t know. My dear Theo, I’ve just received your letter containing 100 francs, I really thank you for it — and for the previous one (also dated Brussels) containing 50 francs. This to tell you that I received them safely. But there should be at least 2 letters that I wrote to you in Paris2 and a roll of drawings, which, as you thought, Koning won’t have sent you. Koning sent me a postcard saying he’d received a note from the Independents, saying that if the paintings weren’t collected between April 5 and 6 they’d be put somewhere else, in storage. He just had to pick them up, if it was between May 5 and 6 that he meant. It’s likely that this excellent young man has somewhat lost his wits in your absence. I’m pleased to hear you’ve sold a Degas and what you write about the purchaser. Meunier — I’ve also seen some very fine things by him myself — and by Henri de Braekeleer too, of course. The chap who came to Paris on behalf of Les Vingt, you know, Los Rios de Guadalquivir or an even more sonorous name than that, made out that De Braekeleer was reduced to helplessness by a brain disease that had completely stupefied him.
   I like to think it’s not true. Have you heard about it? You’ll see from the letters in question that I’ve rented a studio, a whole house with 4 rooms (180 francs per year). Now it’s a matter of going there to sleep, today I’ll buy a mat and a mattress and blanket. I also have 40 francs to pay at the hotel, so I won’t have much left over. But then I’ll be free of this guest-house where you pay too much and where I wasn’t happy. And I’ll begin to have a home of my own. You’ll find details in the letters I’ve already written to you. The mistral’s been blowing hard here, so I’ve done a dozen small drawings which I’ve sent you. The weather’s splendid now, I’ve done another two large drawings and 5 small ones. I’ve found a crate for my consignment, which will go off tomorrow, I hope. 
   I’ll send you those 5 small drawings today, to Brussels. You’ll see beautiful things at Claude Monet’s. And you’ll think what I send you is pretty poor, in comparison. At present I’m unhappy with myself and unhappy with what I’m doing, but I can glimpse some possibility of doing better in future. And I hope that later on, other artists will emerge in this beautiful part of the country. To do here what the Japanese have done in their country. And working at that isn’t so bad. I often took walks with Rappard in the place you mention. Is the suburb and the countryside beyond the Colonne du Congrès called Schaarbeek? I recall a place called, I think, La Vallée de Josaphat, where there are poplars and where Hippolyte Boulenger, the landscape artist, did some fine things. I remember sunsets in the Botanical Garden, seen from the boulevard that runs alongside it. 
   In the crate I’m sending you you’ll find some reeds for Koning. And the address from now on will be place Lamartine 2 I hope — and I have no doubts — that when you get back to Paris it will finally be spring. And not before time, for Heaven’s sake. Living at the hotel you never make progress, and now at the end of a year I’ll have furniture &c. that will belong to me, and while that wouldn’t be worthwhile if I was in the south for only a few months, it’s quite another matter once it’s a question of a long stay. And I have no doubts that I’ll always love nature here, it’s something like Japanese art, once you love that you don’t have second thoughts about it. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo. I’m writing to you again today because, when I wanted to pay my bill at the hotel where I’m staying, I realized once again that I was being fleeced there. I offered to come to some arrangement with them, they weren’t willing to, so when I wanted to take my things they prevented me. That’s all very well, but then I told them we’d explain it all in front of the justice of the peace — who’ll perhaps say I’m in the wrong. Only now it means I have to keep enough money to pay in case it’s said that I’m in the wrong, 67. francs instead of the 40 francs I owe them. And that means I daren’t buy my mattress 
   and I’ll also have to sleep at another hotel. So I wanted to ask you to put me in a position where I could buy my mattress anyway. What often makes me sad is that it’s more expensive than I’d calculated. And that I don’t manage to get by on the same expenses as those who have gone to Brittany, Bernard and Gauguin. Since I’m feeling better now I really don’t consider myself defeated, and besides, if I’d had my health, which I hope to get back here, that and many other things wouldn’t happen to me. The crate would have gone off already if I hadn’t had problems all day long. 
   I say to myself you’ve still received none of my work and I’ve already spent so much money. I’m sending you now in the crate all the studies I have, apart from a few I destroyed, but I’m not signing them all, and there are a dozen that I’ve taken off their stretching frames and there are 14 on stretching frames. There’s a small landscape with a tumbledown house in white, red, green and a cypress beside it — you have the drawing of it and I painted it entirely at home. That should prove to you that if it suited you, I could make little paintings like Japanese prints out of all these drawings. Anyway, we’ll talk about it when you’ve had a look.  For the moment it’s annoying that it means I’m more or less forced to take the step of living at the studio but in time it will mean there’s more peace and quiet for work. 
   Anyway, once these first studies have gone off I’ll start a new series. I had explained all this business to you in the letters that are still in Paris. All the same, I had intended to stay with these people until I was ready. Well, it doesn’t matter. I still want to try and get my crate sent off today. I hope you’ll write soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, For the time being I have to pay my bill, but at the same time it’s stated on the receipt that this payment is only to recover possession of my things, and that the inflated bill will be submitted to the justice of the peace. But with all that I have practically nothing left, I bought what I need to make a little coffee or broth at home, and two chairs and a table. That means I have just 15 francs left. So I’m asking you to send me some more money no later than when you get back to Paris, in any case. It’s very annoying, as this business is seriously interfering with my work — 
   and the weather’s beautiful just now. I regret not having taken this studio sooner. With what those people overcharged me I could already have furnished it. But I really count on it I’ve now paid my dues to misfortune and it’s better that should come at the beginning than at the end of the expedition. I feel sure I’ll soon have several new canvases on the easel. My consignment is packed up and will go off today. But it’s discouraging to work hard and see your profit going into the hands of people you detest. 
   And we’ll put an end to that. I’ll make a studio here that will last, and where if need be we can fit another painter in. Foreigners are exploited here and — for their part, the people around here aren’t wrong — it’s considered a duty to get all you can out of them. Right out in the country like Macknight1 you pay less, but Macknight is very bored and is working very little so far.  And it’s better to work hard and spend more, if it’s absolutely necessary. If you put aside what’s best in the consignment — and if you were to think of these paintings as a payment on my part to be deducted from what I owe you — Then the day when, from my side, I would have contributed something like 10 thousand francs in this way, 
   I would feel more at ease. The money already spent in other years should also come back into our hands, in value at least. I’m still far from that. But I feel that nature here has everything you need to make good things. So it would be my fault if I didn’t succeed. In a single year Mauve made and sold watercolours for 6, francs, according to what he told me at the time. Ah well, there are strokes of luck of that kind for which I can sense a possibility, even through my present worries. In this consignment there are the pink orchard on coarse canvas2 and the horizontal white orchard3 and the bridge, which, if we keep them, I think could go up in value later, and about fifty paintings of that quality would compensate us in a way for the fact that we’ve had too little luck in the past. So take these three for your collection at home and don’t sell them because later on they’ll be worth 500 each. And if we had 50 like that put aside, then I’d breathe a bit more  easily. Anyway — write to me soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve written to you in Brussels again1 to tell you that I hoped you’d be in a position to send me some more money, when you get back to Paris at the latest. Because in order to recover possession of my trunk, I had to pay the whole bill for the time being, while at the same time having got it stated on the receipt that this inflated bill would be verified before the justice of the peace. I’m not sure about winning, although I am absolutely entitled to a deduction of 27 francs and no compensation for all the trouble it’s causing me. First I had an absolutely consuming period of work and then I was so worn out and ill that I didn’t feel I had the strength to go and live on my own — and I’ve put up with things too much, for their present bill they’re basing themselves on a period when I was paying them more (when I was ill and had asked them for better wine). But all in all, it’s so much the better that all of that has now forced me to take this decision. 
   In short, I believe I’m a worker and not a soft foreign tourist here to enjoy himself, and it would be lack of energy on my part to let myself be exploited like that. So I’m starting to set up a studio that may at the same time be of use to our pals, if they come, or if there are painters here. In the crate you’ll first of all find the paintings I did for Jet Mauve and Tersteeg. If in the meantime you should foresee that Tersteeg would take offence at it, well, in a word, if it’s better that I don’t talk to him, then you’ll keep it and you can scrape off the dedication3 and we’ll exchange it with a pal. As for the repetitions of these two studies, I thought the bridge was better than Tersteeg’s but Jet Mauve’s study is simpler than the repetition. Perhaps as it ages this repetition will improve, I worked on it a lot. 
   Then the series of orchards5 — I think the white orchard of which I sent you pen drawing6 and the largest of all in pink and green on absorbent canvas7 are the best. A large study without a stretching frame and another on a stretching frame in which there’s a lot of stippling8 are unfinished, which I regret because the composition gave an overall idea of the large orchards surrounded by cypresses around here. Well, I’ve already written and told you what I thought of them. And you’ll have them soon, since the crate goes off this evening. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent. I think for the frames — the two yellow bridges with blue sky will do well in the dark blue they call royal blue, the white orchard in cold white, the large pink orchard in slightly warm cream. My dear Theo, I’m writing you another few lines to tell you that I’ve been to see the gentleman whom the Arab Jew in Tartarin calls ‘the shustish of the beace’. I still got 12 francs back and my host was reprimanded for keeping my trunk; as I wasn’t refusing to pay, he had no right to hold it. If they’d found in favour of the other party, that would have done me harm, because he wouldn’t have failed to go around saying that I had not been able or not been willing to pay him, and that he’d been forced to take my trunk. Whereas now — because I left at the same time as him — he said as we went that he’d been angry but hadn’t really wished to insult me. But that’s just what he was trying to do, probably seeing that I had seen enough of his shack — and that he couldn’t make me stay — he’d have gone to tell tales where I am at the moment. All right. If I’d wanted to get the actual reduction, I’d probably have claimed more in damages, for example. If I let myself be annoyed by just anybody I’d soon not know where to turn, you understand. 
   I’ve found a better restaurant where I eat for 1 franc. My health’s been better these days. Now I have two new studies like this:  A meadow full of very yellow buttercups, a ditch with iris plants with green leaves, with purple flowers, the town in the background, some grey willow trees — a strip of blue sky.
   If they don’t mow the meadow I’d like to do this study again, because the subject matter was really beautiful and I had trouble finding the composition. A little town surrounded by countryside entirely covered in yellow and purple flowers. That would really be a Japanese dream, you know. Having asked the price for sending the consignment that went off by goods train, it will be 7 francs at the station in Paris. As I don’t have very much left I didn’t put postage on it here — but if they asked more you’d have to complain. The crate is marked UV and W1042. We’ve had the mistral again yesterday and today. I hope my consignment arrives before Tersteeg comes to Paris. Handshake, write to me soon. Ever yours,  Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter containing 100 francs. I’m very glad to have left those people’s place, and my health is much better since. It was their bad food more than anything that made it drag on, and their wine, which was real poison. I now eat very well for one franc or 1. francs. Tasset’s absorbent canvas would be just the thing for me if the canvas itself was three times as coarse. If you run into that gentleman see if you can find out what he uses as primer. It wouldn’t surprise me if his canvas is prepared with pipeclay. If I had information about it I think I’d prepare the canvas myself. It’s not urgent — but see what you can find out. I still have 4 metres of canvas 1 metre 20 wide that I bought here, but it isn’t prepared yet. As soon as there’d be another consignment of colours, he could add primer to that consignment, enough to prepare 4 metres. But anyway, it’s not urgent yet. 
   On your return did those gentlemen speak again about making you travel? In the next few days you’ll see the Danish painter who was here arrive in Paris, I don’t know how to write his name (Moriés?). He’s going to see the Salon and will then go back to his country and come back to the south, in a year perhaps. His last three studies were better and more colourful than what he was doing before. I don’t know what he’ll do later. But he has a good character and I’m sorry he’s going away. I told him a Dutch painter was living with you, and if Koning would like to take him up the Butte Montmartre he’ll probably do some studies there. I’ve talked to him a lot about the Impressionists, all of whom he knew by name or from having seen their paintings, and he’s very interested in the subject. He has a letter of introduction to Russell. He regained his health here and is now very well — he’s good for two years — but after that it would do him good to come back for this same reason of health. What’s this new book on Daumier, L’homme et l’oeuvre? Have you seen the exhibition of the caricaturists?
   I have two new studies, a bridge and the verge of a wide road. Many of the subjects here are just — in character — the same as in Holland — the difference is in the colour. There’s sulphur everywhere where the sun beats down. You know that we saw a magnificent rose garden by Renoir. I imagined I would find similar subjects here, and that was indeed the case when the orchards were in blossom. Now the appearance of things has changed and nature has become much harsher. But what greenness and what a blue! I must say that the few landscapes by Cézanne that I know render it very, very well, and I regret not having seen more of them. The other day I saw a subject just like Monticelli’s beautiful landscape with the poplars that we saw at Reid’s. To find more of Renoir’s gardens you’d probably have to go towards Nice. I’ve seen very few roses here, although there are some, among others the big red roses they call Roses de Provence. 
   To find plenty of subjects is perhaps already something in itself. Provided the paintings are worth what they cost. If the Impressionists go up in value that may become the case. And after a few years’ work we could recoup the past to some extent. And after a year I’ll have a quiet home of my own. I’m curious about what you’ll say about my consignment, I think it takes 10 days to go from here to Paris by goods train. If the consignment includes some that are too poor, don’t show them. The reason I sent you the whole lot is that it will give you an idea of the things I’ve seen. I need to go and look for a new subject, so thanking you very warmly for writing to me so soon, handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, What you write about your visit to Gruby has upset me, but at the same time it reassures me that you went there. Have you considered that your lethargy — a feeling of extreme lassitude — could have been caused by this heart condition, and that in that case potassium iodide couldn’t be blamed for these periods of stupefied exhaustion? If you remember how stupefied I was myself this winter, to the point of being quite incapable! of doing anything whatsoever, apart from a little painting, although I wasn’t taking potassium iodide at all. So if I were you, I’d have it out with Rivet if Gruby tells you not to take it. And it will in any case — I have no doubt about it — be your intention to be friends with both the one and the other. I often think of Gruby here and now, and in short I feel well, but it’s because here I have the pure air and the heat, which make things more possible for me. Among all the trials and the bad air of Paris, Rivet takes things as they are without trying to create a paradise and without in the slightest way trying to make us perfect. But he forges a suit of armour, or rather, he inures us to illness and keeps morale up, I find, by making fun of the trouble we have. 
   So if you could now have just one year of living in the country and close to nature, that would make Gruby’s treatment much easier. So I think he’ll urge you not to see women except in case of necessity, but as little as possible. Now for myself, I feel fine here in that respect, but here, since I have work and nature, and if I didn’t have that I’d become melancholy. As long as work has some appeal for you over there, and the Impressionists are going well, that would be a great gain. Because loneliness, worries, vexations, the need for friendship and fellow-feeling not sufficiently met, that’s what’s very bad, the mental emotions of sadness or disappointments undermine us more than riotous living: us, that is, who find ourselves the happy owners of troubled hearts. I think potassium iodide purifies the blood and the whole system, doesn’t it — will you be able to do without it? Anyway, you’ll have to have a straight talk 
   about it with Rivet, who shouldn’t be jealous. I could wish you had near you something more rudely alive, warmer than the Dutch — but all the same, Koning with his whims is an exception for the better. Anyway, it’s always good to have somebody. But I could still wish you had one or two good friends among the French. Would you do me a great favour: my friend the Dane, who leaves for Paris on Tuesday, will give you 2 small paintings — nothing much — that I’d like to give to Mme the Countess De la Boissière at Asnières. She stays in boulevard Voltaire, on the first floor of the first house at the end of the Clichy bridge. Père Perruchot’s restaurant is on the ground floor. Would you take them to her personally on my behalf, saying I had hopes of seeing her again this spring and that even here I haven’t forgotten her; I gave them 2 small ones last year as well, her and her daughter. I’d have hope that you wouldn’t regret making these ladies’ acquaintance. After all, they’re a family. The countess is far from young but she’s first of all a countess, then a lady, the daughter ditto. 
   And it makes sense for you to go, since I can’t be sure that the family’s staying in the same place this year (however, they’ve been coming there for several years, and Perruchot must know their address in town). Perhaps I’m deluding myself — but I can’t help thinking of them, and perhaps it will be a pleasure for them and for you too, if you meet them. Listen — I’ll do all I can to send you some new drawings for Dordrecht. This week I’ve done two still lifes.  A blue enamelled tin coffee-pot, a royal blue and gold cup (on the left), a pale blue and white chequered milk jug, a cup — on the right — white, with blue and orange designs, on a yellow grey earthenware plate, a blue barbotine or majolica jug with red, green, brown designs, and lastly 2 oranges and 3 lemons; the table is covered with a blue cloth, the background is yellow green, making 6 different blues and 4 or 5 yellows and oranges. The other still life is the majolica jug with wild flowers.
   I thank you very much for your letter and for the 50-franc note. I hope the crate will reach you in the next few days. The next time I think I’ll take the canvases off the stretching frames and send them rolled, by fast service. I think you’ll soon make friends with this Dane — he doesn’t do much but — he has intelligence and a good heart, and he probably started painting not long ago. Take him out a bit one Sunday to get to know him. For myself, I feel infinitely better, my blood is circulating well, and my stomach’s digesting. I’ve found very, very good food now, which had an immediate effect on me. Have you seen Gruby’s face when he pinches his lips tight and says ‘No women’? It would make a really good Degas, that face, like that. But there’s nothing to be said against it, because when you have to work all day long with your brain, calculating, thinking, planning business, that’s quite enough in itself for your nerves. So go off now and visit women in the world of artists and suchlike, you’ll see you’ll succeed — really. You’ll see it’ll work out like that and you won’t lose much, will you? I still haven’t been able to make a deal with the furniture dealer, I’ve seen a bed but it’s dearer than I thought. I feel the need to get more work done before spending more on furniture. My lodgings cost me 1 franc a night. I’ve bought more linen and colours as well. 
   I’ve bought some very strong linen. Just as my blood is returning to normal, so the idea of succeeding is returning to me too. I shouldn’t be too surprised if your illness was also a reaction to this dreadful winter, which lasted an age. And then it will go the same way as with me; take as much spring air as possible, go to bed very early because you’ll need to sleep; and then food, lots of fresh vegetables and no bad wine or bad liquor. And very few women and a great deal of patience. If it doesn’t clear up at once that doesn’t matter. And now Gruby will give you a heavy meat diet over there. Here, for myself, I couldn’t take very much, and it’s not necessary here. It’s just my stupefaction that’s going away, I don’t feel as much need to amuse myself, I’m less at the mercy of my passions and I can work more calmly, I could be alone without being bored. I came out of it feeling a little older, but no sadder. I wouldn’t believe you if in your next letter you told me there was nothing wrong with you any more; it’s perhaps a more serious change and I shouldn’t be surprised if, during the time it will take you to recover, you had some dejection. There is and there remains and it always comes back at times, in the midst of the artistic life, a yearning for — real life — ideal and not attainable. 
   And we sometimes lack the desire to throw ourselves head first into art again and to build ourselves up for that. We know we’re cab-horses and that it’ll be the same cab we’re going to be harnessed to again. And so we don’t feel like doing it and we’d prefer to live in a meadow with a sun, a river, the company of other horses who are also free, and the act of generation. And perhaps in the final account your heart condition comes partly from there; it wouldn’t greatly surprise me. We no longer rebel against things, we’re not resigned either — we’re ill and it’s not going to get any better — and we can’t do anything specific about it. I don’t know who called this condition being struck by death and immortality. The cab we drag along must be of use to people we don’t know. But you see, if we believe in the new art, in the artists of the future, our presentiment doesn’t deceive us. When good père Corot said a few days before he died: last night I saw in my dreams landscapes with entirely pink skies, well, didn’t they come, those pink skies, and yellow and green into the bargain, in Impressionist landscapes? All this is to say there are things one senses in the future and that really come about. 
  . And we, who, I’m inclined to believe, are by no means so close to dying, nevertheless feel the thing is bigger than us and longer-lasting than our lives. We don’t feel we’re dying, but we feel the reality of the fact that we’re not much, and that to be a link in the chain of artists we pay a steep price in health, youth, freedom, which we don’t enjoy at all, any more than the cab-horse that pulls a carriage full of people who, unlike him, are going out to enjoy the springtime. Well then — what I wish you as well as myself is to succeed in recovering our health, because we’ll need it. That Hope of Puvis de Chavannes11 is such a reality. There’s an art in the future and it will surely be so beautiful and so young that, really, if at present we leave it our own youth, we can only gain in tranquillity. Perhaps it’s too silly to write all this, but it’s what I felt; it seemed that like me, you suffered to see your youth going up in — smoke — but if it comes back and appears in what we do, there’s nothing lost, and the power to work is a second youth. So be serious about getting better, because we’ll need our health. I shake your hand firmly, and Koning’s too. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I read an announcement in L’Intransigeant that there’s going to be an exhibition of the Impressionists at Durand-Ruel — there’ll be some works by Caillebotte —I’ve never seen anything of his, and wanted to ask you to write and tell me what they’re like1 — there are certainly other noteworthy things too.  I sent you some more drawings today, and I’m adding two more. They’re views taken from a rocky hill from which you can see in the direction of the Crau (an area from which a very good wine comes), the town of Arles and in the direction of Fontvieille. The contrast between the wild and romantic foreground — and the broad, tranquil distant prospects with their horizontal lines, shading off until they reach the chain of the Alpilles — so famous for the great feats of climbing of Tartarin, P.C.A., and the Alpine Club. This contrast is very picturesque. The two drawings that I’m now adding afterwards will give you an idea of the ruin that crowns the rocks. But is it worth the trouble of making frames for this Dordrecht exhibition? I find it so silly and I’d prefer not to be part of it. I prefer to believe that Bernard or Gauguin will exchange drawings with us in which the Dutch will see nothing. Have you met the Dane Mourier-Petersen — he’ll have brought you another two drawings as well.
   He studied to be a doctor, but I suppose he was discouraged in that by the student life, discouraged by both his pals and his professors. He never said anything to me about it, though, except that he once declared: ‘but doctors kill people’. When he came here he was suffering from a nervous condition that came from the strain of the examinations. How long has he been doing painting — I don’t know — he’s certainly made little progress as a painter, but he’s good as a pal and he looks at people and often judges them very accurately. Could there be a possible arrangement whereby he could come to live with you? As far as intelligence goes, I think he’d be far more preferable to that Lacoste, of whom I don’t think highly, I don’t know why. You’ve absolutely no need of 6th-rate Dutchmen or worse, who when going back to their country do nothing but say and do idiotic things. A dealer in paintings is, unfortunately, more or less a public figure. Anyway, there’s no serious harm done. The Swede10 is from a good family, he has order and regularity in his means of support, and as a man he makes me think of those characters Pierre Loti creates11. For all that he’s phlegmatic, he has a good heart. 
   I plan to do a lot more drawing. It’s already jolly hot, I can assure you. I must add an order for colours12 to this letter — however, if you’d prefer not to get them immediately I’d do a few more drawings and wouldn’t lose anything by it. I’ll also divide the order into two according to what would be more urgent or less. What’s always urgent is to draw, and whether it’s done directly with a brush, or with something else, such as a pen, you never do enough. I’m trying now to exaggerate the essence of things, and to deliberately leave vague what’s commonplace. I’m delighted that you’ve bought the book on Daumier13 — but if you could add to that by buying some more of his lithographs that would be absolutely good — because in the future Daumiers won’t be easy to get hold of. How’s your health, have you seen père Gruby again? I’m inclined to believe he exaggerates your heart condition a bit, to the detriment of the need to treat you rigorously for your nervous system. Well, he’ll certainly realize it as you follow his treatment; with Gruby you’ll last, 
   but unfortunately for us père Gruby himself won’t last, because he’s getting old and when we need him the most he won’t be there any more. I’m thinking more and more that we shouldn’t judge the Good Lord by this world, because it’s one of his studies that turned out badly. But what of it, in failed studies — when you’re really fond of the artist — you don’t find much to criticize — you keep quiet. But we’re within our rights to ask for something better. We’d have to see other works by the same hand though. This world was clearly cobbled together in haste, in one of those bad moments when its author no longer knew what he was doing, and didn’t have his wits about him. What legend tells us about the Good Lord is that he went to enormous trouble over this study of his for a world. I’m inclined to believe that the legend tells the truth, but then the study is worked to death in several ways. It’s only the great masters who make such mistakes; that’s perhaps the best consolation, as we’re then within our rights to hope to see revenge taken by the same creative hand. And — then — this life — criticized so much and for such good, even excellent reasons — we — shouldn’t take it for anything other than it is, and we’ll be left with the hope of seeing better than that in another life. Handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent I hope to have news from you tomorrow, otherwise I’d be in quite a tight corner as I only have money left for tomorrow, Sunday. Have you received the crate at long last? It doesn’t much surprise me that it takes time, though, as the crate had to be transported from one station to another — but — all the same. My dear Theo I see that I didn’t add the sample of canvas to the order for Tasset. So I’m sending you it herewith. I’d hoped to have some news from you today, thinking you would surely have received the crate. I remember writing on the declaration that the crate was to be delivered to your home address.  However, as goods train freight often stays at the station, if you haven’t received the consignment yet it would be a good idea to go by there and see. I’ve got them to agree to repaint the house, the front, the doors and the windows outside and inside. Only I have to pay 10 francs for that myself. But I think it will be well worth the bother. I enjoy working there. 
   The reason I asked for some watercolour paints is because I’d like to do some pen drawings, but coloured in flat tints like Japanese prints. I hope you’ll have as fine a Sunday in Paris as here — there’s splendid sunshine and no wind. Write to me at once, I’ve no money left at all. Handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent What happened in the end to the exchange Koning was going to make with me? He asked me for two of my drawings for one of his studies; I accepted, saying that he should give you the study — but I’ve had no reply to that. If it’s the case that friend Koning has changed his mind and would prefer not to exchange anything — it goes without saying that I would in no way insist on it. My dear Theo, I was very pleased to receive this morning’s letter from you; I thank you very much for the 100-franc note that was included in it. And am glad in the end that the crate has arrived. If you think the Souvenir de Mauve is among those that are passable — then you should add it to the next Hague consignment, with a simple all-white frame. If you found another study among them that seemed to you more suitable for Tersteeg, you should put it in without a dedication, and you should keep the one with the dedication to him, which you could then scratch out. Because it’s better to give him one without any sort of dedication. He can then claim not to have understood that it was a gift for him, and send it back without saying anything if he would rather not have something of mine. I’ll certainly have to give him one myself, to prove that I have some enthusiasm for the cause and that I appreciate his having 
   taken it in hand — but in short, do as it turns out, don’t send any, send that one with or without a dedication, send another one, it makes no difference to me whatsoever. Only as Mauve and he were so close, in the emotion of the moment it seemed to me a very simple thing to do something for Tersteeg at the same time as I was doing a souvenir of Mauve. And I had scarcely another thought but that. So that’s enough. The orchard study you mention — where there’s a lot of stippling — is half of the main subject of the decoration. The other half is the study in the same format, without a stretching frame. And those two together would give an idea of how orchards are laid out here. But I myself thought one study too feeble, the other too harsh, both of them failures. The changeable weather certainly had something to do with it too, and I was like the Russian who tried to swallow up too much ground in a day’s march.
   I’m very curious to see the results of the Gruby system — in the long run, after, let’s say, a year’s application. It will be wise to show up sometimes — to chat with him — and — to extract his real attention, a real, big effort on his part, as Bonger in the end gained his friendship and deeper interest. Then I’d feel easier on your account. I couldn’t feel that way now. The proposal by those gentlemen to have you make short trips overseas is wearing you out. And I blame myself for wearing you out like this — me — with my constant needs for money. It seems to me that what those gentlemen are demanding of you could, however, be reasonable if they first agreed to give you a year’s leave (on full salary) to regain your health. You’d devote that year to going to see all the Impressionists and 
   connoisseurs of the Impressionists at their homes again. That would still be working in the interests of Boussod & Co. After that you’d go off with your blood and your nerves more settled, and fit to do new business over there. But to go and pull the chestnuts out of the fire for those gentlemen in the state you’re in now is to spend a year that will wear you out. And that does nobody any good. My dear brother — the Muslim idea that death only comes when it must come — let’s just see about that. To me, it seems that we haven’t any proof of such a direct guidance from above. On the contrary, it seems to me that it’s been proved that good hygiene may not only prolong life but above all, can make it more serene — its waters more limpid — while poor hygiene not only muddies life’s current, but even more than that, lack of hygiene may put an end to life before time. Have I not myself seen a fine figure of a man die before my very eyes for want of an intelligent doctor — he was so calm and tranquil through all of that, only he kept saying — ‘if I had another doctor’, and he died shrugging his shoulders in a way I’ll never forget. 
    Would you like me to go to America with you? It would be only right that those gentlemen paid my fare. There are many things that wouldn’t matter to me one way or the other, but not that — that you didn’t first build up your health properly. Now I think you need to immerse yourself again even more, both in nature and among artists. And would prefer to see you independent of the Goupils and working on your own account with the Impressionists, to this alternative of a life of travelling with the expensive paintings that belong to those gentlemen. When our uncle was an associate of theirs, in some years he managed to be very well paid — but just count what it cost him. Now you, your lungs are good — but but but — — — a year of Gruby first, and then you’ll see the danger you’re in now. At present you’ve had over 10 years of Paris, which is more than is good. 
   You’ll tell me that Detaille, for example, has had perhaps thirty years of Paris and that he holds himself as straight as a ramrod. Good, do the same if you have comparable capacities. I’m not against it, and our family has a tenacious grip on life. Everything I could wish to say is summed up in this: if those gentlemen make you pull the chestnuts out of the fire over such distances, see that you’re well paid, or refuse, and throw yourself into the Impressionists, doing less business from the point of view of the sums handled, but living closer to nature. For myself, I’m definitely recovering, and since the past month my stomach has improved enormously. I still suffer from unaccountable, involuntary feelings, or a stupor on some days, but it’s getting calmer. I plan to make an excursion to Saintes-Maries, to see the Mediterranean at last. Our two sisters will doubtless be quite happy to come to Paris and it won’t do them any harm, that’s quite certain.
   I’d like everybody to come here to the south too. I’m always blaming myself for the fact that my painting isn’t worth what it costs. We must work nevertheless — but you should know that if circumstances ever made it desirable for me to involve myself more in business, as long as it took a burden off you, I’d do it with no regrets. Mourier will give you two more pen drawings. Do you know what we should do with these drawings? Albums of 6 or 10 or 12, like the albums of original Japanese drawings. I’m very keen to make such an album for Gauguin and one for Bernard. Because the drawings will become better than that.  
   I bought some colours here today, and canvases, because depending on the weather I’ll have to go onto the attack. Another reason why there’s nothing urgent in the order for colours, except the ten large tubes of white. It’s funny that one evening recently at Montmajour I saw a red sunset that sent its rays into the trunks and foliage of pines rooted in a mass of rocks, colouring the trunks and foliage a fiery orange while other pines in the further distance stood out in Prussian blue against a soft blue-green sky — cerulean. So it’s the effect of that Claude Monet. It was superb. The white sand and the seams of white rocks under the trees took on blue tints. What I’d like to do is the panorama of which you have the first drawings12 — it’s so wide — and it doesn’t fade into grey, it stays green to the last line — and that’s blue, the range of hills. Thunderstorm and rain today, which will do good anyway. If Koning prefers a painted study, do whatever turns out. Think carefully before you agree to everything the Goupils demand, and if that brought a change for me, really, now my health’s improving I could work anywhere, and don’t have an idée fixe about work, if it comes to that. Handshake to you and to Koning. Ever yours, Vincent I think that for the white orchard we need a cold and raw white frame. You should know that I’d rather give up my painting than see you wear yourself out to earn money. We need it of course, but have we reached the point where we have to go and look for it so far away? You see so clearly that ‘preparing oneself for death’, a Christian idea — (fortunately for him Christ himself didn’t share it at all, it seems to me — he who loved the people and things of this earth, more than is wise according to those who see him as nothing more than a crackpot), if — you see so clearly that preparing oneself for death is a thing — to leave there for what it is — don’t you also see that — devotion — living for others — is a mistake if it’s complicated by suicide — since in that case one truly makes murderers of one’s friends. So if you’ve reached the point where you have to make trips like that without ever having any peace and quiet, truly that takes away my appetite to recover my own tranquillity. 
 0  And if you agree to these proposals, well and good — but then ask those Goupils to take me on again at my previous salary and take me with you on these trips. People are worth more than things and for me, the more trouble I go to over paintings the more paintings as such leave me cold. The reason I try to make them is to be among artists. You’ll understand — it would grieve me to drive you to earn money, let’s rather stay together in any case — where there’s a will there’s a way, and I feel you’ll cure yourself for a good many years if you cure yourself now. But don’t wear yourself out now, either for me or for others. You know the portrait of Six as an old man, a man who is leaving, his glove in his hand, well, live until you leave like that, that’s how I see you, married, with a solid position in Paris. You’ll play a good role that way. Think it over and consult Gruby before accepting such a proposal. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I thought of Gauguin1 and here we are — if Gauguin wants to come here there’s Gauguin’s fare, and then there are the two beds or the two mattresses we absolutely have to buy. But later on, as Gauguin’s a sailor, there’s a likelihood we’ll manage to make our grub at home. And the two of us will live on the same money as I spend on myself alone. You know I’ve always thought it ridiculous for painters to live alone &c. You always lose when you’re isolated. Well, it’s in response to your wish to help him out. You can’t send him what he needs to live on in Brittany, and me what I need to live on in Provence. But you may agree that we should share, and set a sum of, let’s say, 250 a month if every month, in 
   addition to and apart from my work, you were to have a Gauguin. As long as we didn’t exceed that amount, wouldn’t there even be a benefit? Besides, I’m speculating about joining forces with others. So herewith rough draft of a letter to Gauguin, which I’ll write if you approve, with the changes that will doubtless have to be made to turns of phrase. But I wrote that way first. Think of it as a simple business arrangement, that’s best for everyone, and let’s treat it straightforwardly that way. Only, given that you’re not in business on your own account, you may, for example, think it right that I take it upon myself, 
   and Gauguin would join forces with me as a pal. I thought that you had a wish to come to his aid, as I suffer myself at the thought that he’s in a tight corner — something that won’t change overnight. We can’t offer better than that, and others wouldn’t do as much. For my part, it worries me to spend so much on myself alone, but to find a remedy for that there’s none other than that of finding a wife with money or pals who associate with one another for paintings. Now I don’t see the wife, but I do see the pals. If that suited him, wouldn’t do to keep him waiting. This would be the beginnings of an association, then. Bernard, who’s coming to the south too, will join us, and be sure of this, I still see you in France, at the head of an association 
   of Impressionists. And if I could be useful in putting them together, I’d willingly see them abler than myself. You must feel how much it vexes me to spend more than they do; I have to find a partnership that’s more advantageous, both to you and to them. And that’s how it would be. However, think it over carefully, but isn’t it true that in good company you could live on little as long as you spent your money at home? Later on there may be days when we’ll be less hard up, but I’m not counting on it. It would please me so much if you had the Gauguins first. I’m not good at cooking &c., but they’ve had different training in that, having done their service &c. Handshake and best wishes to Koning, after all, it’s a source of satisfaction for you to deliver him in good condition, which might not have been the case if you hadn’t taken him with you. It’s also satisfactory that the Goupils have been interested in taking that room you suggested. Ever yours, Vincent Has Tersteeg come to Paris yet? In order to prepare things, and to expand on this letter, I’m writing to Gauguin, but without saying anything about all this, just to talk about work. You have to think it over very, very, very carefully before starting to travel. It seems so likely to me that your job is to stay in France.  
   My dear old Gauguin, I’ve thought of you very often and if I’m only writing now it’s because I didn’t want to write empty phrases. The deal with Russell hasn’t come off yet, but Russell has bought some Impressionists all the same, Guillaumin and Bernard and — wait for your moment — he’ll come of his own accord, but I couldn’t press the point further, having had two refusals, but always with a promise for the future. Wanted to write now to tell you I’ve just rented a four-room house here in Arles. And that it seems to me that if I find another painter who feels like getting the most out of the south, and who like me was sufficiently absorbed in his work to be able to resign himself to living like a monk who’d go to the brothel once a fortnight — apart from that, bound up in his work and not inclined to waste his time — then the thing would be good. On my own, I suffer a bit from this isolation. 
   So I’ve very often thought about talking to you about it straight out.  You know that my brother and I have a high regard for your painting and that we’d very much wish to know you were a little at your ease. But all the same, my brother can’t send money to you in Brittany and at the same time money to me in Provence. But would you like to share with me here? Then by joining forces, there would perhaps be enough for two; I’m sure of it, even. Having once attacked the south, I see no reason to give it up. I was ill when I came, I’m better now and in fact, I feel rather attracted to the south, where outdoor work is possible almost all the year round. 
   Living here seems more expensive, though, but isn’t it also the case that the opportunities for gaining paintings are greater? In any event, if my brother were to send us 250 francs a month for both of us, would you like to come, and we would share. But in that case we’d have to make up our minds to eat at home as much as possible; we’d take on some kind of charwoman for a few hours a day, avoiding all the costs of a hotel that way. And you would give my brother one painting a month, while you’d be free to do whatever you liked with the rest. Now the two of us would start exhibiting in Marseille straightaway, thus opening the way for other Impressionists as well as for ourselves. We mustn’t forget that there would now be the cost of travel and of buying a bed, which would also have to be paid for with paintings. 
   You are, of course, free to correspond with my brother about this matter, but I warn you that he’ll most probably refuse to take responsibility for it.  He’ll just assure you that the only means we’ve found up to now of helping you in a more practical way would be this arrangement, if it suits you. We’ve thought about it a good deal. It seems to me that what you need for your health’s sake is peace and quiet above all. If I’m wrong, and if the heat in the south turned out to be too much — well — we’d have to see. For myself, so far I feel very well in this climate. There’s plenty more I could tell you — but here we are, business first. Reply to both of us soon. My dear Theo, If the roll isn’t too big to be accepted at the post office, you’ll receive another large pen drawing1 that I’d very much like the Pissarros to see if they come on Sunday. I’ve just received part of the order for colours, and I thank you very much for it. I leave early tomorrow morning for Saintes-Maries, on the Mediterranean; I’ll stay there till Saturday evening. I’m taking two canvases but I’m a little afraid there could well be too much wind to paint. You go by diligence, it’s 50 kilometres from here. You cross the Camargue, grassy plains where there are herds of bulls and herds of small white horses, half-wild and quite beautiful. 
   I’m taking everything I need in order to draw, especially. I have to draw a lot, for the very reason you were speaking of in your last letter — things here have so much style. And I want to arrive at a more deliberate and exaggerated way of drawing. I’m still a little worried about your plans for travelling, or rather, the proposals about travelling they’re putting to you. Travelling wears you out, and most of all, it unsettles the brain more than can be good for you. In any case, I’d feel it was my fault, telling myself that it’s my needs for money that are driving you to it. No — it’s not good. Then I say to myself that nevertheless we can begin to hope that soon I’ll be selling one or two paintings a month — BECAUSE THINGS WILL GET BETTER. So keep them waiting and talk about it with Gruby, who I dare believe will prefer it if you took things quietly for a year. 
   If I’m wrong about it, and if Gruby tells you a change would be good — but that can’t be the case.  I’ve written to Gauguin, and I only said I was sorry we worked so far from each other, and that it was a pity that several painters hadn’t joined together for a campaign. We have to count on it taking years, perhaps, before Impressionist paintings have a firm value, and so to help him we’ll have to see it as a long-term business. But he has such a fine talent, an association with him would be a step forward for us. I told you very seriously that if you wish, I’ll go to America with you, if, though, this journey was a long one and if it’s worth the trouble. For our part, we have to try not to be ill, because if we were — we’re more isolated than, for example, 
   the poor concierge who’s just died6 — these people have a circle of people around them — and see the comings and goings of the household and live in stupidity. But we’re alone there with our thoughts and would sometimes wish to be stupid. Given the bodies we have, we need to live with pals. Included herewith a few lines to say goodbye to Koning. I have to do things that could get someone like Thomas, for example, to join you in letting those who’ll go here, work here. Then Gauguin would certainly come, I think. Handshake, and many thanks for the colours. Ever yours, Vincent It would be risking a lot to take on Gauguin, but that’s the direction in which we have to work, and I have hopes that you’ll get help from Tersteeg, Thomas, I don’t know from whom, but I hope. My dear Theo, I’m writing to you from Saintes-Maries on the Mediterranean at last — the Mediterranean — has a colour like mackerel, in other words, changing — you don’t always know if it’s green or purple — you don’t always know if it’s blue — because a second later, its changing reflection has taken on a pink or grey hue. It’s a funny thing, the family — quite unintentionally, and despite myself, I’ve often thought here from time to time of our uncle the seaman, who has certainly seen the shores of this sea many times. I’ve brought three canvases and I’ve covered them — two seascapes — a view of the village2 — and some drawings which I’ll send you by post when I get back to Arles tomorrow. I board and eat for 4 francs a day — they started by asking 6.
   As soon as I can I’ll probably come back to do some more studies here. The beach here is sandy, no cliffs or rocks — like Holland — without the dunes and with more blue. You eat better fried fish here than beside the Seine — only there isn’t fish to eat every day, as the fishermen go off to sell in Marseille. But when there is some it’s darned good. If there isn’t any — the butcher’s is no more appetizing than  Monsieur Gérôme’s fellah butcher’s6 — if there’s no fish it’s rather hard to find something to eat here, it seems to me. I don’t believe there are 100 houses in this village or town. The main building after the old church, an ancient fortress, is the barracks. And what houses at that — like those on our Drenthe heaths and peat bogs, you’ll see some specimens in the drawings.
   I have to leave my three painted studies here, because of course they aren’t dry enough to subject them to 5 hours’ jolting in a carriage with impunity. But I expect to come back here. Next week I’d like to go to Tarascon to do two or three studies. If you haven’t already written I’ll expect your letter in Arles, of course. A very handsome gendarme came to interview me here. And the priest too — people can’t be too bad here, because even the priest seemed almost like a decent fellow. Next month will be the public bathing season. Number of bathers varies from 20 to 50. I’m staying till tomorrow afternoon, have still got some drawings to do. 
   I took a walk along the seashore one night, on the deserted beach. It wasn’t cheerful, but not sad either, it was — beautiful. The sky, a deep blue, was flecked with clouds of a deeper blue than primary blue, an intense cobalt, and with others that were a lighter blue — like the blue whiteness of milky ways. Against the blue background stars twinkled, bright, greenish, white, light pink — brighter, more glittering, more like precious stones than at home — even in Paris. So it seems fair to talk about opals, emeralds, lapis, rubies, sapphires. The sea a very deep ultramarine — the beach a mauvish and pale reddish shade, it seemed to me — with bushes. In addition to half-sheet drawings I have a large drawing, the pendant of the last one. More soon, I hope. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your kind letter and the 50-franc note that was enclosed with it. We’ll still have to write to Gauguin. The problem is this bloody journey, since we urge him to make it, and afterwards we’d be in an awkward position if it doesn’t suit him. I think I’ll write to him today and will send you the letter. Now that I’ve seen the sea here I really feel the importance there is in staying in the south and feeling — if the colour has to be even more exaggerated — Africa not far away from one. I’m sending you by same post some drawings of Saintes-Maries. I did the drawing of the boats as I was leaving, very early in the morning, and I’m working on the painting, a no. 30 canvas with more sea and sky on the right. It was before the boats cleared off; I’d watched it all the other mornings, but as they leave very early, hadn’t had time to do it. I have another 3 drawings of huts that I still need and which will follow; these ones of the huts are a bit harsh, but I have some more carefully drawn ones.
   I’ll make you a consignment of rolled-up paintings as soon as the seascapes are dry. Do you see the cheek of these idiots in Dordrecht, do you see that self-importance, they’re very happy to condescend to Degas and Pissarro — of whose work they’ve seen nothing, by the way, any more than of the others. But it’s a very good sign that the young ones are furious, perhaps it proves that there are some old ones who’ve spoken well of it. About staying in the south, even if it’s more expensive — Look, we love Japanese painting, we’ve experienced its influence — all the Impressionists have that in common — and we wouldn’t go to Japan, in other words, to what is the equivalent of Japan, the south? So I believe that the future of the new art still lies in the south after all. But it’s bad policy to live there alone when two or three could help each other to live on little. 
   I’d like you to spend some time here, you’d feel it — after some time your vision changes, you see with a more Japanese eye, you feel colour differently. I’m also convinced that it’s precisely through a long stay here that I’ll bring out my personality. The Japanese draws quickly, very quickly, like a flash of lightning, because his nerves are finer, his feeling simpler. I’ve been here only a few months but — tell me, in Paris would I have drawn in an hour the drawing of the boats? Not even with the frame. Now this was done without measuring, letting the pen go. So I tell myself that gradually the expenses will be balanced by work. I’d like us to earn a lot of money to bring good artists here who too often get despondent in the mud on the Petit Boulevard. Fortunately it’s extremely easy to sell the right sort of paintings in the right sort of place to the right sort of gentleman. Since the distinguished Albert9 gave us the formula, all our 
   difficulties have disappeared by magic. You only have to go down rue de la Paix10 — there strolls, just for that purpose — the good art lover. If Gauguin came here, he and I could perhaps accompany Bernard to Africa when he goes there to do his service. What have you decided about our two sisters? Anquetin and Lautrec — I think — won’t like what I’m doing. Apparently an article on Anquetin has appeared in the Revue Indépendante in which he seems to have been called the leader of a new movement in which Japonism was even more marked, &c. I haven’t read it, but after all — the leader of the Petit Boulevard is without any doubt Seurat, and young Bernard has perhaps gone further than Anquetin in the Japanese style. Tell them I have a painting of boats, that and the Langlois bridge13 could suit Anquetin. What Pissarro says is true — the effects colours produce through their harmonies or discords should be boldly exaggerated. It’s the same as in drawing — the precise drawing, the right colour — is not perhaps the essential element we should look for — because the reflection of reality in the mirror, if it was possible to fix it with colour and everything — would in no way be a painting, any more than a photograph. More soon, handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo — If Gauguin wants to accept, and if the only obstacle to going into business would be the travel, it’s better not to keep him waiting. So I’ve written, although I hardly had the time, having two canvases on the easel. If you think the letter’s clear enough, send it, if not, it would be better for us, too, to abstain when in doubt. And the things you would do for him shouldn’t upset the plan to bring our sisters over, and especially not our needs, yours and mine. Because if we ourselves don’t keep ourselves in a state of vigour, how can we claim the right to get involved in other people’s troubles? But at present we’re on the way to remaining vigorous, and so let’s do the possible, what’s right in front of us. I’m sending you enclosed herewith canvas sample for Tasset; however, I don’t 
   know if we should go on with his canvas. If you send me the5 next letter by Sunday morning, I’ll probably go off to Saintes-Maries again at 1 o’clock that day and spend the week there. I’m reading a book about Wagner which I’ll send you afterwards7 — what an artist — one like that in painting, now that would be something. It will come. Do you know that at 

6 rue Coëtlogon, rue de Rennes,


on  7 and 8 June from 1 to 7 o’clock


there’s an exhibition of paintings and drawings by


Régamey


 that could be very interesting; now there’s two who’ve travelled all over the place, he and his brother. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent.  I believe in the victory of Gauguin and other artists — but — between then and now there’s a long time, and even if he had the good fortune to sell one or two canvases — it would be the same story. While waiting, Gauguin could peg out like Meryon, discouraged. It’s bad that he’s not working — well, we’ll see his reply. My dear Theo, On Monday morning I received your telegraphed money order for 50 francs, for which I thank you kindly. But I haven’t yet received your letter, which surprised me a little. I’ve received a letter from Gauguin, who said he’d received a letter from you containing 50 francs, by which he was very touched, and in which you said a few words about the plan. As I had sent you my letter to him, he hadn’t yet received the more clear-cut proposal when he wrote. But he says that he has the experience that when he was in Martinique with his friend Laval, the two of them together managed better than either one of them alone, and that he therefore fully agreed on the advantages a life in common would have. He says the pains in his bowels are still continuing, and he seems quite unhappy to me. He talks about a hope he has of finding capital of six hundred thousand francs to set up a dealer in Impressionist paintings, and that he would explain his plan and that he’d like you to be at the head of this business. I shouldn’t be surprised if that hope is a fata Morgana, a mirage that goes with being broke. The more broke you are — especially when you’re ill — the more you think of such possibilities. So I see first and foremost in this plan yet another proof that he’s despondent, and that the best thing would be get him back on his feet as quickly as possible. 
   He says that when sailors have to move a heavy load or raise an anchor, in order to be able to lift a greater weight, to be able to make an enormous effort, they all sing together to support each other and to give each other energy. That it’s just what artists lack. So I’d be really surprised if he weren’t glad to come. But the costs of the hotel5 and the journey are made even more complicated by the doctor’s bill, so it will be jolly hard. But it seems to me that he should ditch the debt and leave some paintings as security if he’s going to come here, and if the people don’t agree to that, leave the debt in the lurch without any paintings as security. Wasn’t I forced to do the same thing in order to come to Paris? And although I suffered the loss of many things then, it can’t be done otherwise in cases like that, and it’s better to go forward anyway than to go on being depressed. I haven’t left for Saintes-Maries — they’ve finished painting the house and I had to pay, and I also have to buy quite a considerable supply of canvas.  And out of the fifty francs I’ve got one louis7 left and we’re only Tuesday morning, and so it was hardly possible for me to leave and I fear it won’t yet be possible next week either. 
   I was pleased to learn that Mourier has come to lodge with you. If Gauguin would prefer to take the risk of throwing himself back into business at this point — if he really has hopes of doing something in Paris — for Heaven’s sake let him go there, but I think he’d be wiser to come here for a year at least; I’ve seen someone here who had been to Tonkin and was ill when he came back from that delightful region — he recovered here. I have two or three new drawings and also 2 or three new painted studies. I went to Tarascon one day, unfortunately there was so much sun and dust that day that I came home empty-handed. I’ve had reports of 2 Monticellis in Marseille, a bouquet of flowers at 250 francs and figures. It was Russell’s friend, Macknight, who had seen them there. I’d very much like to go there sometime, to Marseille. I still continue to find the subjects here very beautiful and interesting, and despite the vexations of expenses, I nevertheless think there’s a better chance in the south than in the north. If you saw the Camargue — and many other places — like me, you’d be very surprised to see that it has a character absolutely à la Ruisdael. 
       I have a new subject on the go, green and yellow fields as far as the eye can see, which I’ve already drawn twice and am starting again as a painting, just like a Salomon Koninck, you know, Rembrandt’s pupil who made the vast flat landscapes. Or it’s like something by Michel or like Jules Dupré, but it’s really quite different from rose gardens. It’s true that I’ve only visited one part of Provence, and in the other part there’s the countryside that Claude Monet does, for example. I’m very curious to know what Gauguin will do. He says that in the past he got people to buy Impressionists to the tune of 35 thousand at Durand-Ruel’s, and that he hopes to do the same thing again for you. But it’s so bad, when you start having trouble with your health you can no longer risk sudden impulses, and I think Gauguin’s most solid asset is now his painting, and the best business he could do, his own paintings. It’s likely that he’ll have written to you in the past few days; I answered his letter last Saturday. I believe it would be pretty hard to pay all he owes over there and his fare, &c. &c. If Russell bought a painting from him — but he has the house he’s building, which puts him in financial difficulties. But I’ll still write to that effect, I think. I have to send him something myself for our exchange, and if Gauguin wishes to come, then I’ll be able to ask with confidence. It’s certain that if in exchange for the money we’d give G. we buy his paintings at the current price, it’s in no way money wasted. I’d very much like you to have all his paintings of Martinique. Anyway, let’s do what we can. Handshake, I hope you’ll write soon. Ever yours, Vincent What’s Rodin’s bust of a woman in the Salon? It can’t possibly be the bust of Mrs Russell — which he must be working on, though. Doesn’t our friend Mourier have a terrific accent? He bropaply alvays trinks brendy viz vater. My dear Theo, I’m writing you another line because I haven’t yet received your letter. But I presume you’ll have said to yourself that I would probably be at Saintes-Maries. As the rent for the house and the painting of the doors and windows and the purchase of canvases have all come together and drained me dry, you’ll do me a very great service by sending me some money a few days early. I’m working on a landscape with wheatfields which I believe is no worse than the white orchard, for example. It’s of the same kind as the two Butte Montmartre landscapes that were in the Independents, but I think it’s more substantial and that it has a little more style. And I have another subject, a farmhouse and wheat stacks, which will probably be its pendant. I’m very curious to know what Gauguin will do. I hope he’ll be able to come. You’ll tell me it serves no purpose to think about the future, but painting progresses slowly, and in that respect one does need to calculate ahead. 
    Gauguin, no more than I, would be rescued if he sold a few canvases. In order to be able to work we must organize our lives as much as possible and need a reasonably firm basis to have our existence assured. If he and I stay here for a long time we’ll make paintings that are more and more personal, precisely because we’ll have studied things in this part of the world more deeply.  It’s quite hard for me to imagine myself changing direction; having made a start on the south it’s better not to move than — penetrating ever deeper into the region. I believe I have more chance of succeeding in doing things — even business affairs — that are a bit larger, than if I hold back and do them too small. And that’s precisely why I think I’m going to enlarge the format of my canvases and boldly adopt the square 30 canvas.
   Those cost me 4 francs each here and that isn’t dear, considering the transport. The last canvas absolutely kills all the rest; there’s only a still life with coffee-pots and cups and plates in blue and yellow that can stand beside it. It must be in the drawing. What I’ve seen of Cézanne involuntarily comes back to mind, because he has presented the harsh side of Provence so forcefully — as in the harvest we saw at Portier’s. It has become something quite different from in the spring, but I certainly have no less love for nature that is starting to get scorched as early as now. There’s old gold, bronze, copper in everything now, you might say, and that, with the green blue of the sky heated white-hot, produces a delightful colour which is exceedingly harmonious, with broken tones à la Delacroix.
         If Gauguin wished to join us, I believe we’d have taken a step forward. It would establish us squarely as miners of the south, and nobody could find fault with that. I have to achieve the firmness of colour that I have in that painting that kills the rest. When I think that in the past Portier used to say that the Cézannes that he’d had looked like nothing at all seen on their own, but put next to other canvases they’d beat the colour of the others hollow.  And also that the Cézannes did well in gold, which presupposes a very highly pitched range of colour. So perhaps, perhaps, I’m on the right track and my eye’s adapting to nature here. Let’s wait a little longer to be sure. This last painting can bear the red surround of the bricks with which the studio is paved. When I put it on the floor against this very red red-brick background, the colour of the painting doesn’t become hollow or white-looking. The countryside near Aix — where Cézanne works — it’s precisely the same as here, it’s still the Crau. If, coming home with my canvas, I say to myself: look, I’ve arrived precisely at père Cézanne’s tones, I only want to say this, that Cézanne, belonging absolutely to the region itself, like Zola, and therefore knows it so intimately, you have to do the same internal calculation to achieve the same tones. Goes without saying that seen together they’d hold their own, but there would be no resemblance. Handshake, I hope you’ll be able to write in the very next few days. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, When in doubt, it’s better to abstain1 — that, I believe, is what I said in the letter to Gauguin, and that’s what I believe now, having read his reply. If he, for his part, returns to the proposal — he’s perfectly free to return to it — but we’d look I’m not quite sure what, if for the moment we pressed the point, to make him say yes. You see that I’ve received your letter; I thank you very much for it and there were many things in it, I thank you very much for the 100-franc note — as for the delay with the telegram, it was dated Sunday, so it’s the postman’s fault, but it hardly mattered, since the coach for Saintes-Maries leaves every day. But what stopped me was the need to buy canvases and pay the rent. I have already mentioned to you that I didn’t like Tasset’s canvas very much for outdoor work. In future I think we’ll take the ordinary kind. I bought 50 francs’ worth of canvas with stretching frames — also because I need stretching frames of different sizes to stretch canvases on, even though I’ll send them to you rolled up. They’re the rather large sizes, 30, 25, 20, 15, all square. It seems to me that the large sizes (after all, it’s not very large) suit me better. But I speak about what you write in your letter. I congratulate you on having the Monet exhibition at your premises, and I much regret not seeing it. It will certainly do Tersteeg no harm to have seen this exhibition;6 he’ll still come round to it, but as your idea was too, very late. It’s indeed curious that he’s changed his mind on the subject of Zola. I know from experience that he couldn’t bear to hear him spoken about. What an odd character Tersteeg is; we shouldn’t give up hope with him — the splendid thing about him is that however rigid and fixed his opinions may be, once he has acknowledged that something is in fact different from what he had imagined — as with Zola — then he changes and becomes bold for the cause. Unfortunately, we don’t get to be old in modern times, and Mr Tersteeg has lived longer now than he still has to live. And where is his successor? My God, what a sad thing it is that you and he are not entirely as one in business matters these days. But what can you say — it’s what I believe they call a fatality. You were fortunate to meet Guy de Maupassant7 — I’ve just read his first book, Des vers, poems dedicated to his master, Flaubert. There’s one, ‘Au bord de l’eau’, that’s already him. So you see, what Vermeer of Delft is beside Rembrandt among painters, he is among French novelists beside Zola. In short, Tersteeg’s visit isn’t at all what I’d dared hope, and I make no secret of it to myself that I miscalculated the odds on his cooperating. And perhaps on the business with Gauguin, too. Let’s take a look at that: I thought he was at bay and I blame myself for having money and the pal who works better than I, not — I say, he’s entitled to half if he wishes. But — if Gauguin isn’t at bay, then I’m not in too much of a hurry. 
   And I categorically withdraw from it, and the only question for me remains quite simply this: If I looked for a pal to work with, would I be doing the right thing, would this be more beneficial to my brother and me, would the pal lose or would he gain by it? So these, then, are questions that certainly preoccupy me, but which need to come face to face with reality in order to become actual facts. I don’t wish to discuss Gauguin’s plan, having considered the situation once — last winter — you know the results. You know that I believe that an association of the Impressionists would be something along the lines of the associations of the 12 English Pre-Raphaelites, and that I believe that it could come into being. That I’m therefore inclined to believe that the artists would guarantee their livelihood amongst themselves, mutually, and independently of the dealers, each agreeing to give a substantial number of paintings to the society, and that earnings as well as losses would be shared. I don’t believe that this society would last indefinitely, but I believe that during its lifetime we would live courageously and would produce. But if tomorrow Gauguin and his banker Jews come and ask me for nothing but 10 paintings for a society of dealers and not a society of artists, well, I don’t know if I’d trust them — I who would be glad, on the other hand, to give 50 to a society of artists. Isn’t it a bit the way it was with Reid — why say that Gabriel de la Roquette’s a scoundrel if you do the same yourself? Why say artistic Society if it’s made up of bankers? Enough, for Heaven’s sake, let our pal do as his heart tells him, but his plan is far from making me enthusiastic. I prefer things as they are — to take them the way it is, without changing anything about them, to half-baked reforms. The great revolution, art for the artists, my God, perhaps it’s a utopia, and too bad, then. 
   I think life’s so short and goes by so fast. Now, being a painter you have to paint, all the same. And you’re also well aware that because at that time — last winter with Pissarro and the others, we happened to talk about it a lot, I’m now making a big effort to add nothing more except this, that speaking for myself, before next year I want to make my contribution of 50 paintings. If I manage to do that then I’ll stick to my opinion. I’ve sent you 3 drawings by post today. The one with the wheat stacks in a farmyard will seem too bizarre to you, but it was done in great haste as a project for a painting, and it’s to show you what it’s like. Now, the harvest is a bit more serious. And that’s the subject I’ve been working on this week, on a no. 30 canvas14 — it’s hardly done at all — but it kills the rest of what I have, apart from a still life, worked on with patience. Macknight and one of his friends who’s been in Africa too16 saw this study today and said it was the best I’d done. Like Anquetin and our friend Thomas — you’re really not sure what to think of yourself when you hear people say that, but I say to myself: the rest must look bloody awful, to be sure. Well then — on days when I bring back a study I say to myself, if it was like this every day things could work — but on days when you come home empty-handed and you eat and spend money all the same, you don’t feel content with yourself, and you feel like a madman, a scoundrel or an old fool. And dear old Doctor Ox, I mean our Swede, Mourier, I liked him well enough because, with his spectacles, he went naїvely and benignly about this wicked world, and because I presumed he had a heart that was purer than many a heart, and even with more of a leaning towards rectitude than many of the cleverest people have. And as I knew he hadn’t been painting for very long it made not a bit of difference to me that his work was the very height of inanity. And I saw him every day for months. All right. So what can be the reason for his losing his qualities? This is how I imagine the case to be. Bear in mind that he came to the south to get over a nervous disorder caused by a whole lot of problems he’s had, and as a result of which he changed career.
    He was perfectly well here, he was very calm, &c. But the shock of Paris was too great, the change too sudden, he didn’t find the Paris of his dreams, and there he is, worried and perhaps disagreeable, and in any case doing silly things. He’ll soon have sown his wild oats, I hope. While waiting, let him do whatever he likes without attaching any importance to it. He’s placing huge hopes in Russell (I believe), he’s looking for an adviser and a teacher — now — no need to tell you that Russell will perhaps not be everything he needs, but I believe that Russell will see that he’s someone who doesn’t know the circles of people with whom he’s dealing, and I think that Russell will take him seriously and will try to be good for him. I believe that Russell is making a name for himself among those who have an instinctive fear of Paris. It’s hard to explain what I mean by that. Russell is such a good man19 — but you know, you can’t recommend that people love Paris, or force them to, any more than you can recommend a pipe or black coffee with cognac. And Russell’s rich and has lost money in Paris, so he can and does say to people: ‘see what I’ve had to deal with’. But in any event, I’ll write a word to Russell. It seems that Macknight wasn’t very pleased with me but that Russell indicated to him in reply that he should shut up. All this to tell you I understand very, very well — seeing he has turned out like that — that you’re not in complete agreement with the Swede, who probably, according to what you write, has had a recurrence of his nervous trouble and is irritated by Paris. If he has money to waste in taking a studio like Gérôme’s, it would be serious. As I’m slightly doubtful that he has a huge amount to waste, he’s in for a bit of a drubbing that’s not undeserved, I’d say. There’s nothing to be done if he won’t listen, but you can’t live with him. I won’t write to Gauguin direct — I’ll send you the letter — because when in doubt, it’s better to abstain. IF WE SAY NO MORE, if the reply shows we’ve said something like that but that there has to be an initiative in the matter from his side too, then we’ll see if he’s keen on it. If he isn’t keen on it, if it’s all one to him, if he has something quite different in mind, let him remain independent, and me too. Handshake to you and to Mourier. Ever yours, Vincent I find this in particular rather strange in this plan of Gauguin’s: the society offers its protection in exchange for 10 paintings that the artists will have to give, if ten artists do that, the Jewish company clearly pockets 100 paintings ‘for a start’. The protection of this society that doesn’t even exist costs a lot of money. 
   Here’s the letter for Gauguin — I’m well aware that in his there is this passage ‘I ask (underlined) if, the capital having been raised for the most part, your brother would use his efforts to make a success of the business and to be its director’. I’m well aware that he also writes, ‘I accept your proposal in principle’. But I believe that it could lead us too far if we weren’t a little firm in showing him that our proposal was without all these afterthoughts, and that we ourselves are too hard up to be able to risk anything other than setting up house together and sharing the month’s money. And it’s true I didn’t know he had so large a family; he’ll more likely wish to stay in the north for that reason. The most radical thing we could do would be for me to give up the south, and if that would get him out of trouble, go and join him in Brittany myself. And the desire I have to work in the south is naturally subordinate to the interests of people like him. All the same, we shouldn’t change lightly.  And I’m a little afraid of getting a dressing-down for having separated him from his family, or a hornet’s nest like that. Dear God, if he has such a large family his obligations are probably not to be absent from them any more. And perhaps he’d be much happier if you simply bought a painting from him from time to time. 
   If now I haven’t mentioned these two passages and other passages in his letter it’s because it seems far too difficult to me to say yes to that in all honesty. However, if it was the case that his whole plan is nothing but a fata Morgana, and as such will vanish, he’ll speak of it again of his own accord. But there’s the fare, the debt at the inn, the doctor’s bill; now he’s talking about another debt of 300 francs which he’ll settle with that painting if his collector agrees. But if he doesn’t agree? Well now, it wouldn’t be very prudent to give him hopes beyond our resources and commit ourselves to doing more than we could stick to. It’s all very well for Gauguin to say, he’s very very upset and it’s a pity, and it can’t be good for his work. No, we shouldn’t change what we’ve said and consider that the thing isn’t going ahead because of doubts and changes whose presence isn’t a good sign. The more I calm myself here and the more I regain my strength, the more I feel that work is the most secure thing. I admit that if living in Brittany is much less expensive, if necessary I must sacrifice my plan to work here, and I’ll do it willingly if it’s to his benefit. But all the more reason to work hard on the 50 paintings I wished to have before talking again about projects of the kind we discussed last winter. A letter from home arrives just now. You know I feel so well now that it isn’t indispensable that I stay here for my health alone. We have to act so that you aren’t completely overwhelmed by expenses, that’s what’s necessary and that’s serious enough in itself.  My dear Theo, I’ve just read Geffroy’s article on Claude Monet. What he says is really very good. How I’d love to see that exhibition! If I console myself for not seeing it, it’s because when I look around me there are many things in nature that hardly leave me time to think about anything else. Because it’s harvest time just now. I had a letter from Bernard, who says he feels very isolated but works all the same — and has written a new poem about himself in which he makes fun of himself in a rather touching way. And he asks: ‘what’s the use of working’? But he asks that while working; he tells himself that work’s of no use whatsoever, while working — which is not at all the same thing as saying it while not working. I’d very much like to see what he’s doing. I’m curious to know what Gauguin will do, and if Bernard won’t go to join him in Pont-Aven; I already gave each of them the other’s address a while ago, because they could need one another. I’ve had a week of concentrated hard work in the wheatfields right out in the sun, the result was some studies of wheatfields, landscapes3 and — a sketch of a sower. In a ploughed field, a large field of clods of purple earth — rising towards the horizon — a sower in blue and white. On the horizon a field of short, ripe wheat. 
   Above all that a yellow sky with a yellow sun. You can sense from the mere nomenclature of the tonalities — that colour plays a very important role in this composition. And the sketch as such — a no. 25 canvas — also worries me a lot, in the sense that I wonder whether I shouldn’t take it seriously and make a tremendous painting out of it. My God, how I’d love to do that. But I just wonder whether I’ll have the necessary power of execution. I’m putting the sketch aside just as it is, hardly daring to think about it. For such a long time it’s been my great desire to do a sower, but the desires I’ve had for a long time aren’t always achieved. So I’m almost afraid of them. And yet, after Millet and Lhermitte what remains to be done is... the sower, with colour and in a large format. Let’s talk about something else. I have a model at last — a Zouave — he’s a lad with a small face, the neck of a bull, the eye of a tiger, and I started doing one portrait and started again on another. 
   The bust-length I painted of him was terribly hard. In a uniform the blue of blue enamel saucepans, with dull orange-red trimmings and two lemon-yellow stars on his chest, a common blue and very hard to do. I’ve stuck his very tanned, feline head, wearing a bright red cap, in front of a door painted green and the orange bricks of a wall. So it’s a coarse combination of disparate tones that isn’t easy to handle — the study I did of it seems very hard to me, and yet I’d always like to work on portraits that are vulgar, even garish like that one. It teaches me, and that’s what I ask of my work above all. And now the second portrait will be seated; full length, against a white wall. Did you notice Dessins Raffaëlli — La rue, published recently by Le Figaro? The main one’s just like place Clichy, with all its bustle, it’s really alive. Figaro must also have published an issue with drawings by Caran d’Ache.  In my last letter I forgot to tell you that I received — a fortnight ago now — the consignment of colours from Tasset. I’m badly in need of a new consignment because for these studies of wheatfields and Zouaves I’ve eaten up plenty of tubes. Only a third or half is urgent. Among the studies of wheatfields there’s the wheat stacks, for which I’ve sent you the first idea, on a square no. 30 canvas.
   The past two days we’ve had torrential rain that lasts all day and will change the appearance of the fields. It came absolutely unexpectedly and suddenly, while everyone was out harvesting. They got most of the wheat in just as it was. I’m hoping to do a tour in the Camargue next Friday, with a vet, there are bulls and almost wild white horses there, pink flamingos too.  I wouldn’t be at all surprised if it was very beautiful. The canvas isn’t at all urgent either. I’m very curious to know what Gauguin will do, but to dare to urge him to come — no — because I’m no longer sure if that would sit well with him. And perhaps — given his large family it’s more his duty in fact to risk some big affairs in order to earn the money to put him at the head of his family again. I should in any case not like to diminish an individual through an association, and if he feels the desire to try this affair in question he may have his reasons and I wouldn’t like to deflect him from it if in fact he were to be keen on it. Which remains to be seen and which will perhaps emerge from his reply. More soon, I hope. Handshake, and thanks for the newspaper, and great success with your exhibition. Yours truly, Vincent What’s père Tanguy doing, have you seen him recently? It’s still fine by me to ask him for paint, even if his isn’t quite as good, but only as long as it’s not too expensive. My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and the 50-franc note it contained. I didn’t know that the article on Claude Monet was by the same hand as the one on Bismarck. It does you good to read things like that, more than the majority of articles by the Decadents, with their fondness for saying the most banal things in strangely convoluted ways. I’m really unhappy with what I’ve done these past few days, because it’s very ugly. And yet the figure interests me much more than landscape.  I’ll send you a drawing of the Zouave today all the same. To do studies of figures, to attempt them and to learn would still after all be the shortest route for me to do something of value. Bernard’s in the same position. Today he sends me a croquis of a brothel4 that I’m sending you enclosed herewith to pin up next to the acrobats by him that you have. On the back of the drawing there’s a poem with very much the same tone as the drawing, it’s likely that he has a more finished painted study of it.
   I wouldn’t be surprised if he wanted to make an exchange with me for the head of a Zouave, although that one’s very ugly. But as I wouldn’t wish to deprive him of saleable studies I wouldn’t suggest an exchange unless at the same time we could buy something from him for a small sum. It’s still raining a lot here, which does a lot of damage to the wheat, which is still standing. But luckily I had a model these past few days. I’ll need a book, A B C D du dessin by A. Cassagne. I requested it at the bookshop here, and after waiting a fortnight they tell me they need the name of the publisher, which I don’t know. If you could send me it I’d be very pleased. The negligence, the lazy carelessness of people here is indescribable and one is really put out by the least things. That’s the reason I’ll have to go to Marseille one of these days, to be able to get what I need from over there. The cost of carriage from Paris isn’t always pleasant, and makes things dearer, but there you are, to go to Marseille specially, that makes them even dearer. It quite often makes me feel sad that painting’s like a bad mistress one might have, who’s always spending, spending and it’s never enough, 
   and to say to myself that even if there happens to be a passable study from time to time, it would be much less expensive to buy them from others. The rest, the hope of doing better, is also a bit of a fata Morgana. Well, there’s not much remedy for all that, unless some day or other one could enter into an association with a good worker and produce more together. As for the publisher of Cassagne’s book — you probably have his treatise on perspective, and the address should be in it. Besides, they have these books at Latouche’s, and in rue de la Chaussée d’Antin, at the place of that man who always has works by Allongé. It’s very good that Claude Monet found a way of making these ten pictures between February and May. To work quickly isn’t to work less seriously, it depends on the confidence and experience one has. In the same way, Jules Gérard the lion-hunter says in his book that at the beginning young lions have a lot of trouble killing a horse or an ox, but old lions kill with a single well-judged strike from a claw or a tooth, and have an amazing sureness for that job.
   I don’t find the southern gaiety here that Daudet talks about so much, on the contrary, an insipid affectation, a sordid carelessness, but that doesn’t mean that the region isn’t beautiful. All the same, nature here must be very different from Bordighera, Hyères, Genoa, Antibes, where there’s less mistral, where the mountains give a quite different character. Here — except for a more intense colour, it reminds one of Holland, it’s all flat — only one thinks more of the Holland of Ruisdael and Hobbema and Ostade rather than the Holland of today. What amazes me is how few flowers there are, so no cornflowers in the wheatfields, seldom any poppies. What was the cost of the carriage for the crate of pictures recently? The impastos on some canvases are dry on the surface but not enough to roll them up; if it wasn’t for that I’d send them. Macknight has a friend with him now, I never see any of his work, yesterday I showed him and his friend four or five new studies, which they looked at in icy silence. I think for their part they’re preparing a big surprise, which I hope will be a good one. Because it would please me greatly to see that they’d found a direction. Handshake to you and to Mourier if, that is, he hasn’t yet moved into the studio like Gérôme’s. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, If we take a whole piece of ordinary canvas, this is the net price, which I’ve just found out by chance:1 

Ordinary rough yellow canvas, No. 02
 


Width two metres
 


Whole piece 10 metres long
 


Price 40 francs


The discount is definitely 25%; 
    probably the price from the factory — 
    at first hand — 33 1/3%.

 So here’s an opportunity to check Tasset’s prices. Leaving aside, or not, the 5 metres that I’d requested, the best thing would be to take a whole piece. Having recently bought some canvases from which I’ll keep the stretching frames, it’s a big saving. To do a no. 30 canvas — not counting the stretching frame, which I have — the canvas doesn’t cost me 1. (at the price quoted above) and at present, with the stretching frame, 4 francs. Count 1 franc for the stretching frame — which costs less; on every no. 30 canvas that makes a difference of 1., and more. This extra goes for carriage, which will be 5 francs. 
   See — if you can — what Tasset says when you ask him the price by the piece, but what I’m telling you about the price by the piece is just so, and you’ll be able to compare. Do you remember among the small drawings a wooden bridge with a washing-place — a view of a town in the background? I’ve just painted that subject in large format. I must warn you that everyone will find that I work too quickly. Don’t you believe a word of it. Isn’t it the emotion, the sincerity of our feeling for nature, that leads us and — if these emotions are sometimes so strong that we work — without feeling that we’re working — when sometimes the brushstrokes come in a sequence and in relation one to another like the words in a speech or a letter — 
   then we have to remember that it hasn’t always been like that, and that in the future there will also be quite a few heavy days without inspiration. So we have to strike while the iron’s hot and lay aside the bars we forge. I don’t yet have half of the 50 canvases fit to be presented in public, and I need all of them by the end of this year. I know in advance that they’ll be criticized as hasty. I also know that I very much hope to stick to my argument of the past winter, when we talked about an association of artists. Not that I still have a great desire or hope to bring it about, but as it was a serious argument, we have to retain our seriousness and retain the right to come back to it, to this question. If Gauguin weren’t to come to work with me, then I have no other resources to balance my expenses but my work. 
   This prospect only mildly frightens me. If my health doesn’t let me down I’ll do a whole heap of my canvases and out of that lot there’ll be some that will do. I’m almost reconciled with the orchard, which wasn’t on a stretching frame, and its pendant with the stippling. Out of the whole lot, they’ll do. But I’m working with less trouble in the full heat than back in the spring. Soon I’ll send you some rolled canvases, and the rest as and when it’s possible to roll them up. I’d very much like to double the order for the zinc whites. This zinc white is part of the reason why everything dries so slowly, but it has other advantages in the mixtures. 
   Wasn’t it pleasant at Guillaumin’s last winter — finding the landing and even the stairs, not to mention the studio — chock-full of canvases? You understand since then that I have a certain ambition, not about the number of canvases, but that these canvases as a whole should, after all, represent a real labour on your part as well as mine. The wheatfields — that has been an opportunity to work, like the orchards in blossom. And I only just have time to prepare myself for the new campaign, the one on the vineyards. And between the two I’d like to do some more seascapes. The orchards represented pink and white,
the wheatfields yellow,
the seascapes blue.
 Perhaps now I’ll have a try at doing greens. Now autumn — that gives you the whole range of tones. 
   I’m quite curious to know what Gauguin will do — the main thing is not to discourage him — I still think his whole plan was just a whim. Do you know what I’d like to tell you once again — this — that my personal desires are subordinate to the interests of a number of people, and that it always seems to me that another person could benefit from the money I spend by myself. Either Vignon, or Gauguin, or Bernard, or someone else. And that for these arrangements, even if they’d involve my moving, I’m prepared. Two people who get along don’t spend — and even three — much more than one. No more on colours, either. So — without counting the surplus of finished works — there would be the satisfaction for you of providing for two or three people instead of one. 
   This for sooner or later. And as long as I’m as strong as the others. You can be sure of this, that it would be hard for us to be deceived, seeing that if they make difficulties about working, I know those difficulties too. And I’d perhaps know what it was all about. Now, we’d have a perfect right — and perhaps even a duty — to urge them to work. And that’s what we have to do. If I’m alone, my word, I can’t do anything about that — then I have less need for company than for frantic work, and that’s why I’m boldly ordering canvas and paints. And so I only feel life when I’m working at full stretch. And in company I’d feel a bit less need to do that, or rather, I’d work on more complicated things. But in isolation I can count only on my excitement at certain moments, and then I let myself 
   run to extravagances. And so the canvases I bought here really not so long ago are almost all covered. When I send you the rolled up canvases you could perhaps take quite a few unimportant things off their stretching frames. So as to be able, at the end of the year, let’s say, to show 50 of them to Pissarro and the others. And the rest, it’s studies, which will be a source of information, and being thoroughly dried, we can keep them in a portfolio or in a cupboard without their taking up a lot of space. Handshake to you, and to the pals if you see any of them. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Probably in order to convince myself that, as I myself am one of the most absent-minded of mortals, I have no right to criticize the people of the south for their carelessness — I once again made the mistake of addressing my letter to 54 rue de Laval instead of 54 rue Lepic. So when they returned the letter to me opened, the people at the Post Office had the pleasure of being able to edify themselves by contemplating Bernard’s brothel. I’m hurrying to send you back the letter as it is. I’ve just received — this morning — part of the order for colours, from Tanguy. His cobalt is too poor to order more from him. His chromes are quite good, so we could continue from now on to ask him for them. But instead of carmine he sends dark madder, which doesn’t matter much — but neither is the carmine very reliable in his poor run-down hole. It’s not his fault, but in future I’ll write Tanguy next to the names of the colours, if they can be had from him. Yesterday and today I worked on the sower, which has been completely reworked. The sky is yellow and green, the earth purple and orange. There’s definitely a painting like that to be made of this splendid subject, and I hope it will be done one day, either by someone else or by me. The question remains this — Christ’s boat by Eugène Delacroix5 and Millet’s sower6 are of entirely 
   different workmanship. Christ’s boat — I’m talking about the blue and green sketch with touches of purple and red and a little lemon yellow for the halo, the aureole — speaks a symbolic language through colour itself. Millet’s sower is colourless grey — as are Israëls’s paintings too. Can we now paint the sower with colour, with simultaneous contrast7 between yellow and purple for example (like Delacroix’s Apollo ceiling, which is precisely yellow and purple), yes or no? Yes — definitely. So do it then! — yes — that’s what père Martin9 says too, ‘you must make the masterpiece’. But get down to it — and you fall into a whole metaphysics of colours à la Monticelli, a mess from which it’s damned awkward to escape with credit. And that makes you absent-minded, like a sleep-walker. If only one was doing something good. Well, let’s keep our courage and let’s not despair. I hope soon to send you this effort, with some others. I have a View of the Rhône — the Trinquetaille iron bridge, where the sky and the river are the colour of absinthe — the quays a lilac tone, the people leaning on the parapet almost black, the iron bridge an intense blue — with a bright orange note in the blue background and an intense Veronese green note. One more effort that’s far from finished — but one at least where I’m attempting something more heartbroken and therefore more heartbreaking. Nothing from Gauguin. I very much hope to receive your letter tomorrow, forgive my carelessness. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Many thanks for the colours — more soon. My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter, the 50-franc note and the Tasset consignment, colours and canvases, that has just arrived. He’d enclosed his invoice, which comes to 50. francs, which enabled me to check his prices and compare them with Edouard’s. He’s considerably cheaper than Edouard, which, combined with the 20% discount, means we can have no complaints about him. Now, for his canvas at 4., I’ll probably be able to find out the price by the piece at first hand. Now your letter brings me a big piece of news — that Gauguin accepts the proposal. Indeed, the best thing would be for him to dash straight over here instead of sorting out the mess he’s in there; perhaps he’ll get into another one if he comes to Paris first. Perhaps, too, with the paintings he’ll bring he’ll make a deal, which would be very fortunate. My reply enclosed. I really want to say just this, that I feel enthusiastic not only about painting in the south — but just the same in the north too, feeling healthier than 6 months ago. So if it’s safer to go to Brittany where one can board for so little4 — from the point of view of outgoings I’m definitely prepared to go back to the north. But it must be good for him too, to come to the south. Especially since in 4 months it’ll already be winter in the north. And this seems so certain to me, that two people having exactly the same work must, if circumstances prevent their spending more, be able to live at home on bread, wine and, well, everything else one might wish to add to that. The difficulty is to eat at home alone. Restaurants here are expensive because everyone eats at home. 
   Certainly neither Ricards nor Leonardo da Vincis are less beautiful because there are few of them — on the other hand, Monticellis, Daumiers, Corots, Daubignys and Millets aren’t ugly because in many cases they were done at great speed and there are relatively many of them. As for landscapes, I’m beginning to find that some, done more quickly than ever, are among the best things I do. It’s like that with the one of which I sent you the drawing, the harvest and the wheat stacks too5 — it’s true I have to retouch everything to adjust the workmanship a little, to harmonize the brushstrokes, but all the essential work was done in a single long session, and I’ll spare it as much as possible when I go back to it. But when I come back from a session like that I can assure you my brain is so tired that if that sort of work is repeated often — the way it’s been during this harvest — I become totally distracted and incapable of a whole lot of ordinary things. At these moments the prospect of not being alone isn’t unpleasant. And I think very, very often of that excellent painter Monticelli, who people said was such a drinker and insane, when I see myself coming back from the mental labour of balancing the six essential colours, red — blue — yellow — orange — lilac — green. Work and dry calculation, in which one’s mind is extremely stretched, like an actor on the stage in a difficult role — where you have to think 
   of a thousand things at the same time in a single half hour. Afterwards — the only thing that comforts and distracts — in my case — as in others, is to stun oneself by taking a stiff drink or smoking very heavily. Which is no doubt not very virtuous, but it’s in order to go back to Monticelli. I’d really like to see a drinker in front of a canvas or on the boards. Of course, it’s all too crude a lie, this whole malicious, Jesuitical tale of the Roquette woman about Monticelli. Monticelli the logical colourist, able to carry out the most ramified and subdivided calculations on the ranges of tones that he balanced, certainly overtaxed his brain doing that work, as did Delacroix and Richard Wagner. But if he did perhaps drink, it was only because — Jongkind too7 — being physically stronger than Delacroix and suffering more physically (Delacroix was richer), it was, then — I, for one, would be well inclined to believe — because if they hadn’t done it — their rebellious nerves would have played other tricks on them. And Jules and Edmond de Goncourt say this, word for word — ‘we took very strong tobacco to stupefy ourselves’ in the furnace of creation.
   Don’t believe, then, that I would artificially maintain a feverish state — but you should know that I’m in the middle of a complicated calculation that results in canvases done quickly one after another but calculated long beforehand. And look, when people say they’re done too quickly you’ll be able to reply that they looked at them too quickly. And besides, I’m now going over all the canvases a little more before sending them to you. But during the harvest my work has been no easier than that of the farmers themselves who do this harvesting. Far from my complaining about it, it’s precisely at these moments in artistic life, even if it’s not the real one, that I feel almost as happy as I could be in the ideal, the real life. If all goes well and Gauguin thinks it’s a good idea to join us, we could make the thing more serious by suggesting to him that he puts all his paintings in common, with mine, to share profits or losses. But that won’t happen or will happen of its own accord, depending on whether he found my painting good or bad, and also on whether or not we did things in collaboration. Have to write to Russell now, and I’ll hasten my exchange with him. We’ll have to work hard to try to sell something from my side to help with the expenses, but let’s take heart, despite our difficulties in working to safeguard the artists’ life, we’ll have fire in our bones. Handshake, I’ll write to you again soon. I’m going to the Camargue for 2 or 3 days, to do some drawings there. Ever yours, Vincent Good that you’re bringing our sisters over. Be patient a little longer with Mourier, perhaps he’s going through a crisis.  I’ll write to Mourier one of these days; you’ll read the letter, you’ll see the way I used to talk to him. I can see the drawing from here!!! The head in the style of Delaroche. My dear Theo, Work occupies me so much, I can’t manage to write. I’d have liked to write to Gauguin again, because I fear he may be iller than he says — his last letter in pencil looked so much that way. In that case, what’s to be done — I have no reply from Russell yet. Yesterday, at sunset, I was on a stony heath where very small, twisted oaks grow, in the background a ruin on the hill, and wheatfields in the valley. It was romantic, it couldn’t be more so, à la Monticelli, the sun was pouring its very yellow rays over the bushes and the ground, absolutely a shower of gold. And all the lines were beautiful, the whole scene had a charming nobility. You wouldn’t have been at all surprised to see knights and ladies suddenly appear, returning from hunting with hawks, or to hear the voice of an old Provençal troubadour. The fields seemed purple, the distances blue. 
   And I brought back a study of it too, but it was well below what I’d wished to do. Tasset hadn’t sent enough zinc white the other day. I get on very well using it, but it has the disadvantage of drying very slowly, so, for example, the studies done at Saintes-Maries aren’t dry yet. I’d planned to go to the Camargue, but the vet who ought to have come to pick me up to do his rounds with him left me in the lurch. I don’t really mind, as I’m only moderately fond of wild bulls. It’s to my astonishment that I can already see the bottom of my wallet; it’s true that I had my month’s rent to pay. You must clearly know that if I deduct food and lodging, all the rest of my money still runs away on canvases. In short, they turn out rather expensive, without counting the trouble they cause. 
   However, I dare hope that one day the money we spend will come back in part, and if I had more money I would spend even more trying to find good rich colorations.  Here’s a new subject. A corner of a garden with round bushes and a weeping tree, and in the background, clumps of oleanders. And the lawn that has just been mown, with long wisps of hay drying in the sun. A little corner of blue green sky at the top.
   I’m reading Balzac, César Birotteau, I’ll send it to you when I’ve finished it8 — I think I’ll re-read all of Balzac. When I came here I had hoped it would be possible to create art lovers here — so far, I haven’t made a centimetre’s progress into people’s hearts. Now Marseille? I don’t know, but that could well be nothing but an illusion. In any case, I’ve rather stopped speculating about it. So, many days pass without my saying a word to anyone except to order supper or a coffee. And it’s been like that from the start. But up until now loneliness hasn’t bothered me very much, I’ve found the stronger sunshine and its effect on nature so interesting. Write to me a day or two earlier if you can; the end of the week will be a bit tight. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, I thank you for your letter and the 50-franc note that was enclosed with it. About the Tanguy business, don’t get involved in it. Only I beg you not to risk the new paintings that are at his place, so take them back as a response to the fact that he presented you with an account and asked for a down payment. Bear in mind that you’re dealing with the Tanguy woman — and if not, if HE behaves like that then it’s the case that he’s dealing dishonestly towards me. Tanguy still has a study of mine that he thought he could sell. I owe him it, if it comes to it, but I don’t owe him a sou in money. To get into an argument about that is to argue with mère Tanguy, which no mortal should be obliged to do. According to them (the Tanguys), Guillaumin, Monet, Gauguin, all owe them money; is that true or not?? In any case, if they don’t pay, why should I pay? I regret having wished to get colours from him again to please him, he can expect that in future I won’t get any more from him. With mère Tanguy, who’s poisonous, it’s a question of doing it on the quiet — I beg you to take back my new paintings. And that’s enough. 
   Tanguy’s zinc white at 40 centimes is a little dearer than Tasset’s large tubes (at 1. francs), which contain at least 4 times as much. Leave Tanguy the study he has of Asnières — a bank of the Seine. It’s his, if it comes to it — but kick him out afterwards — and without mercy. If you made a down payment — but that would be to acknowledge a debt that I dare deny. Never — so don’t let yourself be taken in. The only thing I actually owe is to Bing. In the sense that there are still 90 francs worth of Japanese prints on commission. But if we take into account that I’ve often sent people directly to Bing, it would be better that Bing leave us that, and if I was still there to deal with it, I’d wish to increase the stock so as to be able to do slightly more important business in them. And if I don’t ask Bing for a commission, it’s precisely that I would bring it up in case of claims. That’s to tell you that other claims would probably have no merit. At the moment I’m concentrating on doing something to enhance the value of my paintings. You know I have only one means of achieving that end — it’s to paint them. 
   But I say to myself that if I manage to do 50 studies at 100 francs this year I shall in a certain sense not have done a great injustice by eating and drinking as if that was a right. Now that’s a bit steep, because although at this moment I have about thirty painted studies, I don’t reckon them all at that price. All the same, there must be some out of all of them. But — the costs of executing them make me very, very poor even so — I wouldn’t press the point if people didn’t come, like our friend(?) Tanguy, asking for down payments when the debt is dubious in the extreme. Whatever money you might have at your disposal for this purpose, well, I’d have the greatest possible need of it. I go without many things — not that I consider that a misfortune, but I consider that my money that I’ll need in future depends to some extent on the vigour of my efforts at present. They quibbled with me at the post office, saying that the drawings I was sending you were too big to be sent that way. I have two large new ones. When there are 6 I’ll send them by rail, in a roll. I say to myself that if the studies are hard to dry here in the heat, they’d be all the harder to dry at your place. And that’s making me delay the consignment. I’ve scraped off one of the large painted studies. A Garden of Olives — with a blue and orange Christ figure, a yellow angel — a piece of red earth, green and blue hills. Olive trees with purple and crimson trunks, with grey green and blue foliage. Sky lemon yellow. 
   I scraped it off because I tell myself it’s wrong to do figures of that importance without a model. Of course — it would be better in my opinion too if Gauguin came here — for that reason of the coming winter. Still no reply from Russell. That Boch is still staying with Macknight, and he’s working hard, it seems. But I haven’t seen anything yet. He’s a lad whose outward appearance I like very much. Face like the blade of a razor, green eyes, and distinction with all that. Macknight seems very coarse beside him.  After what you told me about him, I’m going to see him this afternoon. Macknight has picked up a chancre from a fat woman where I was going at the same time, just by sheer luck I was careful — but what’s the use of being careful, since you can’t do anything and since after all, all’s always for the best in the best of worlds? I read that Bing’s holding a Japanese exhibition and publishing a magazine on Japanese art. Have you seen that? At times I find it terrible not to be able to get a whole lot more Japanese prints. Well, we ought to try to do them ourselves instead. Have you read Loti’s book, Madame Chrysanthème? Very interesting. I have to tell you exactly the same thing today as last Thursday, the end of the week will be very tight, if you can send the next letter a day or two earlier, so much the better. 
   Have you been able to find that book, A. Cassagne, ABCD du dessin? I really will need it. Mourier should definitely buy one for himself. I’ll write to Russell again, while at the same time thinking I’d do better to wait for his reply. But I’ll write this evening anyway, and that’s just why I’ll go and see his friends Macknight and Boch, to be able to talk about them and have an opportunity to say something to him before he replies to me. If the other 4 drawings I have in my head are like the first two I have, then you’ll have the epitome of a really beautiful corner of Provence. It’s good of Guillaumin to have come to have a look, I’m very sensitive about it, but in short, I’m unhappy with everything I’m doing. Why move around a lot? When I see the orchards again won’t I be more hardened, won’t it be like something new, a new attack, in the new season, on the same subject? 
   And the same throughout the year, for the harvest, for the vineyards, for everything. I’d like to send you the 30 studies14 at this moment, so that it may perhaps help with the costs to be found in order for Gauguin to come. It’s very good, what Schuffenecker’s done. And père Thomas — he really ought to buy from me or from Gauguin for a hundred francs — then we’d be nearly there. What’s Bing’s exhibition like? If you happened to see their manager16 there, tell him I’m here and that I ask him to leave my stock alone, and that if I was there I’d go to more trouble for him. The Lautrecs have just arrived; I find them beautiful. More soon, I’ll write to you again in the next few days — but don’t fall for the Tanguy woman’s trick, because it’s not fair and it upsets me that père Tanguy should behave like that. You can be sure that if I owed him I would say so but there are other conditions, such as that I’ll never pay him in money and that he still has NO MORE THAN AN AMICABLE right to the paintings. Ever yours, Vincent Just you watch, Bernard will have the same story with the Tanguys, only worse. My dear Theo, I’ve just come back from a day at Montmajour, and my friend the second lieutenant1 kept me company. So the two of us explored the old garden and we stole some excellent figs there. If it had been bigger it would have made you think of Zola’s Paradou, tall reeds, grape vines, ivy, fig trees, olive trees, pomegranate trees with fat flowers of the brightest orange, hundred-year-old cypresses, ash trees and willows, rock oaks. Half-demolished staircases, ruined Gothic windows, clumps of white rock covered in lichen, and pieces of collapsed wall scattered here and there in the undergrowth; I brought back another large drawing of it. Not of the garden, though. That makes 3 drawings;3 when I have half dozen, will send them. Yesterday I went to Fontvieille to pay a visit to Boch and Macknight, but those gentlemen had left for a week for a short trip to Switzerland. I think the heat is still doing me good, in spite of the mosquitoes and flies. The cicadas — not those at home but like this,  you see them in Japanese albums. And golden and green Cantharides swarming on the olive trees. These cicadas (I think their name is cicada) sing at least as loudly as a frog.
   I had the further thought that if you care to recall that I painted portraits of père Tanguy (which he still has), of mère Tanguy (which they sold), of their friend (it’s true that I was paid 20 francs by him for the latter portrait), that I bought 250 francs worth of colours from Tanguy without a discount, on which he of course made a profit, that after all, I was no less his friend than he was mine, I have the most serious of reasons to doubt his right to demand money from me, which is actually settled with the study of mine that he still has, all the more so since there’s the clearly expressed condition that he would be paid with the sale of a painting. Xanthippe, mère Tanguy and some other ladies have, by some strange freak of nature, brains of flintstone or gunflint. Certainly these ladies are much more harmful in the civilized society in which they move than the citizens bitten by rabid dogs who live at the Institut Pasteur. So père Tanguy would be right a thousand times over if he killed his lady but he doesn’t do it, any more than Socrates And for that reason père Tanguy is more closely connected — in terms of resignation and long patience — with the early Christian martyrs and slaves than with present-day Paris pimps. Which doesn’t mean there’s any reason to pay him 80 francs, but there are reasons for never losing your temper with him, even if he might lose his temper when, rightly so in this case, you kick him out, or at least send him packing in no uncertain terms. 
   I’m writing to Russell at the same time — we probably know, don’t we, that the English, the Yankees &c. have this in common with the Dutch, that their charity — —  is very Christian. Now, the rest of us not being very good Christians That’s what I can’t stop myself thinking as I write once again. That Boch looks a bit like a Flemish gentleman from the time of the compromise of the nobles in the time of the Silent one and of Marnix. I wouldn’t be at all surprised if he was good. I’ve written to Russell that for our exchange I’d send him my consignment rolled up, straight to his home, if I knew he was in Paris. This way he should in any case reply to me in the next few days. And now I’ll need more canvas and paint soon. Only I don’t yet have the address for that canvas at 40 francs for 20 metres. I believe that at this moment I’m doing the right thing by working chiefly on drawings, and seeing to it that I have colours and canvas in reserve for the time when Gauguin comes. I very much wish we could rein ourselves in as little with paint as with pen and paper.
   Because I’m afraid of wasting paint, I often spoil a painted study. With paper — if it’s not a letter I’m writing but a drawing I’m doing — it hardly ever goes wrong: so many sheets of Whatman, so many drawings. I think if I were rich I’d spend less than now. Ah well — père Martin would say — then we’ll have to make sure we get rich — and he’s quite right, just as he is about the masterpiece. Do you remember in Guy de Maupassant the gentleman who hunted rabbits and other game and who had hunted so hard for 10 years and was so worn out with running after game that at the point when he wanted to get married he couldn’t get a hard-on, which caused him the greatest anxieties and consternation. Without being in this gentleman’s position as far as having or wishing to get married, in the physical sense I’m beginning to resemble him. According to the excellent master Ziem, a man becomes ambitious the moment he can’t get a hard-on. Now, while it’s more or less the same to me whether or not I can get a hard-on, I protest when it must inevitably lead me to ambition. There is no one but the greatest philosopher of his time and of his country, and therefore of all countries and all times — the excellent master Pangloss16 — who could — if here were there — give me advice and calm my soul.
   There we are — the letter for Russell is in its envelope — and I’ve written as I thought. I asked him if he had news of Reid, and I put the same question to you. I told Russell that he was perfectly at liberty to take what he might want, and from the first consignment too. And that I was only waiting for a categorical answer to know whether he wanted to choose at his home or yours. That in the first case, if he wanted to see them at his home — you’d send him some orchards too. And that you’d have all of them brought back, once he’d made his choice. So he can’t say anything to that. If he doesn’t buy a Gauguin it’s because he can’t. If he can do it, I’d be inclined to hope he will do it. I told him that if I was bold enough to insist on a purchase, it wasn’t that without him the thing wouldn’t come about, but that Gauguin having been ill, and given the complication that he’d been in bed and had to pay his doctor, the business was rather hard for us and we were all the more eager to find a collector for a painting.   I think about Gauguin a lot, and would have plenty of ideas for paintings and for work in general. At the moment I have a charwoman, who sweeps and scrubs the house twice a week for 1 franc;17 I place great hopes in her, to be able to count on her making the beds if we decide to sleep at home. On the other hand, there’s a possible arrangement with the chap where I’m lodging at the moment. Anyway, we’ll try to ensure that in the end it’ll be a saving instead of an expense. How’s your health now? Are you still seeing Gruby? What you were saying about that conversation at the Nouvelle Athènes18 is interesting. You’re familiar with Desboutin’s little portrait that Portier has. It’s certainly a strange phenomenon that all artists, poets, musicians, painters are unfortunate in the material sense — even the happy ones — what you were saying recently about Guy de Maupassant proves it once again. That rakes up the eternal question: is life visible to us in its entirety, or before we die do we know of only one hemisphere?
   Painters — to speak only of them — being dead and buried, speak to a following generation or to several following generations through their works. Is that all, or is there more, even? In the life of the painter, death may perhaps not be the most difficult thing. For myself, I declare I don’t know anything about it. But the sight of the stars always makes me dream in as simple a way as the black spots on the map, representing towns and villages, make me dream. Why, I say to myself, should the spots of light in the firmament be less accessible to us than the black spots on the map of France. Just as we take the train to go to Tarascon or Rouen, we take death to go to a star. What’s certainly true in this argument is that while alive, we cannot go to a star, any more than once dead we’d be able to take the train. So it seems to me not impossible that cholera, the stone, consumption, cancer are celestial means of locomotion, just as steamboats, omnibuses and the railway are terrestrial ones. To die peacefully of old age would be to go there on foot. For the moment I’m going to go to bed because it’s late, and I wish you good-night and good luck. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo I’ve just sent you by post a roll containing 5 large pen drawings. You have a 6th of this Montmajour series. A group of very dark pines and the town of Arles in the background. Later I hope to add a general view of the ruin (you have a hasty croquis of it among the small drawings). Being unable, at this moment when we’re embarking on the partnership with Gauguin, to be of use on the money side, I’ve done all I could to show through work that I take the matter to heart. As I see it, the two views of the Crau and the countryside along the banks of the Rhône are the best I’ve done with my pen. Should Thomas by chance want them? He can’t have them for less than 100 francs each. Even if I had to give him the three others as a gift in that case, as we’re in urgent need of money. But we can’t give them for less, that’s what it costs. And not everyone would have the patience to let themselves be eaten up by the mosquitoes, and to struggle against this infuriating nuisance of the constant mistral, not to mention that I’ve spent whole days out of doors with a bit of bread and some milk, it being too far to be going back to town all the time. I’ve already told you more than once how much the Camargue and the Crau — apart from a difference in colour and the clearness of the atmosphere — make me think of the old Holland of Ruisdael’s day. It seems to me that these two sites in the flat countryside, covered with vines and stubble fields, seen from above, will give you an idea of it. 
   I assure you that I’m tired out by these drawings; I’ve started a painting too — but no means of doing it with the mistral, absolutely impossible. Now about this canvas — I’ve compared Tasset’s new canvas at 4. francs with the price for the same quality from Bourgeois — (it’s in his catalogue that I tracked down the price of ordinary canvas, 40 francs per 20 square metres). Ah, well, once again Tasset hasn’t charged any more; it was exactly the same price. Follows from that that we also ought to be able to have ordinary canvas at 2 francs per square metre at Tasset’s, and in future we’ll do well to take that, which is certainly good enough for studies. Please write me a short line straightaway, to know if the drawings have arrived in good condition; they gave me a piece of their mind again at the post office because it was too big, and I’m afraid they’ll perhaps make problems in Paris. All the same, they took them, which pleased me, because after the 14 July holiday8 you’ll perhaps not be unhappy about refreshing your eye on the expanses of this Crau. The appeal that these vast landscapes have for me is very intense. And so I’ve felt no annoyances
   in spite of some essentially annoying circumstances, the mistral and the mosquitoes. If a view makes one forget those little vexations, there must be something in it. However, you see there’s no effect, at first sight it’s a map, a strategic plan as far as workmanship goes. Besides, I also went for a walk there with a painter, who said: now there’s something that would be bothersome to paint. But it must be 50 times that I’ve been to Montmajour to look at this flat view — am I wrong? I also went for a walk there with someone who was not a painter, and as I said to him: look, to me that’s as beautiful and infinite as the sea, he replied — and he knows it, the sea — I like that better than the sea because it’s just as infinite and yet you feel it’s inhabited. How I’d make a painting of it if there wasn’t this bloody wind! That’s the thing that’s annoying here when you plant your easel somewhere. And it’s definitely for that reason that the painted studies aren’t as finished as the drawings. The canvas shakes all the time. For drawing it doesn’t bother me. 
   Have you read Madame Chrysanthème? It really gave me a lot to think about, that the real Japanese have nothing on their walls. The description of the cloister or pagoda where there’s nothing (the drawings, the curiosities, are hidden in drawers). Ah, so that’s how you have to look at a japonaiserie — in a nice bright room, completely bare, open to the landscape. Would you like to try it out with these two drawings of the Crau and the banks of the Rhône which don’t look japanese and which are perhaps more so than others, in fact? Look at them in a nice bright café where there’s nothing else in the way of paintings — or out of doors. There should perhaps be a reed frame like a thin strip of wood. Myself, I work here in a bare interior, 4 white walls and red tiles on the floor. If I insist on your looking at these two drawings this way it’s because I would like so much to give you a true idea of the simplicity of nature in these parts. Lastly — because of Gauguin, what if we were to show the drawings, the harvest and the Zouave as well, to Thomas? Handshake, and thank you for the 12 tubes of zinc white that Tasset has just sent. Ever yours, Vincent I’m curious to know if Mourier will remember the places. My dear Theo, I thank you very much for your letter and the 100-franc note it contained. Now, I approve of your idea of settling Bing’s account, and I’m sending you back fifty francs for that purpose.  But it seems to me that it would be a mistake to ‘have done’ with Bing — oh no — on the contrary I wouldn’t be astonished if Gauguin, like me, will wish to have some of these Japanese prints here. So do what you think best about paying him the full 90 francs for the stock and then taking more for a full 100 francs. Or else Bing will replace the merchandise represented by the enclosed 50 francs. But. If it was possible — all the Japanese prints we have at home being beautiful — it would be better to take the whole stock back. We’re getting them so cheaply and we can give pleasure to so many artists with them, we should after all keep what favour we have with père Bing. I went to his place myself 3 times at New Year to pay, when I found the shop closed, probably for stocktaking. Then a month later, before I left, I no longer had the money and I’d also given a good many Japanese prints to Bernard, when I made the exchanges with him.
   But take the Hokusais as well then, 300 views of the sacred mountain and scenes of manners and customs. There’s an attic at Bing’s, and in it there’s a heap of 10 thousand Japanese prints, landscapes, figures, old Japanese prints too. One Sunday he’ll let you choose for yourself, so take plenty of old sheets too. He’ll take some from you when he goes through them, but he’ll leave you some. Their manager’s a very decent fellow, as it seemed to me, and good to people who are seriously interested in the subject. I myself don’t understand why you don’t have the fine Japanese prints at boulevard Montmartre. He’ll give you some of the best ones on deposit, I’m sure. But it’s not my business, after all, but our personal stock, that I do value. In any event, make it clear to him that we’re not making anything on it, that we’re putting ourselves to trouble over the deal, that lastly, we’re sometimes responsible for sending people to him. 
   When I was in Paris I always hoped to have a showroom of my own in a café; you know that that fell through. The exhibition of Japanese prints that I had at the Tambourin had quite an influence on Anquetin and Bernard, but it was such a disaster. For the 2nd exhibition at the showroom on boul. de Clichy, I have fewer regrets about the time and effort. Bernard having sold his first painting there, Anquetin having sold a study there, and I having made the exchange with Gauguin, we all got something. If Gauguin were willing we could do a Marseille exhibition all the same. But better not rely any more on the people of Marseille than on Paris. But please, keep the Bing stock. The benefit’s too great. As far as money goes, I’ve lost rather than gained on it — fine — but it gave me the opportunity to see a lot of Japanese art, at leisure and over time. And that should last, it seems to me. Your apartment wouldn’t be what it is without the constant presence of Japanese prints. Now the Japanese prints cost us 3 sous each. For 100 francs, if we pay the 90 francs, besides all of what we have left, 
   we’ll have a new stock of 660 Japanese prints. Or half of them for the 50 francs enclosed. I hadn’t counted on a 100-franc note among the 50-franc ones this month, knowing that you’re grappling with the Gauguin business and the arrival of our sisters. So I’ll get by somehow this month. I’m working on some drawings for Bernard so that he’ll send me some of his. I’ll happily exchange Tanguy’s flowers for a new study, if he’s given up hope of the flowers. The point is that we have hardly any of the flowers left. But his account is as ridiculous as a bill that I would present for my part, in these terms: 

portrait
of Tanguy
50


,,        
,,  Mrs Tanguy
50


,,
,, a friend
50


Money Tanguy has made on colours
50


Friendship &c
50



________________ 



Total 200 francs


 Payment of this bill isn’t urgent, but an advance would nevertheless be agreeable to me. So, enough of that. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 

   By the way, about this book of Cassagne’s: the difficulty of finding the publisher, always supposing there is one, will soon be over if I tell you that l’a b c d du dessin par A. Cassagne is the text (sold separately, I believe, at a price of 5 francs) of Le dessin pour tous par Cassagne, the 100 instalments with which you’re certainly familiar. Now, it has occurred to me that the book should be from the same publisher as the instalments. I’ve sent you a roll of drawings. If you went to see Thomas with these, and added the (I believe there are 4 of them) other drawings in the same format, perhaps we’d pick up a few sous from père Thomas if you explain to him the rather exceptional reasons there are at this moment for our wanting to do a deal. Or again, Thomas could buy something from Gauguin
   if he knows the partnership we have in train. If you pay for the first stock in full, why don’t we ask 200 francs in commissions instead of less? Whatever we do, we mustn’t stop holding stock. All my work is based to some extent on Japanese art, and if I’ve said nothing about this to Bing it’s because I think that after my journey in the south I’ll be able to take the subject up again perhaps more seriously. Japanese art, in decline in its own country, is taking new roots among French Impressionist artists. It’s this practical side for artists that necessarily interests me — more than the trade in japonaiseries. However, this trade is all the more interesting because of the direction that French art is tending to take. Write me a short line to tell me if the drawings reach you in good condition. My dear Theo, You’ll already have received my letter of this morning, in which I’d included 50-franc note for Bing, and it’s about this Bing business again that I wanted to write to you. The fact is, we don’t know enough about Japanese art. Fortunately, we know more about the French Japanese, the Impressionists. That’s definitely the essence and the main thing. So Japanese art, properly speaking, already with its place in collections, already impossible to find in Japan itself, is becoming of secondary interest. But this doesn’t mean that if I had a single day in which I could see Paris again I wouldn’t call at Bing’s precisely to go and see the Hokusais1 and other drawings from the true period. What Bing himself, by the way, also said to me when I so much admired the run-of-the-mill Japanese prints, that later I’d see that there’s also something else. Loti’s book, Mme Chrysanthème, taught me this: the apartments are bare, without decorations or ornaments. And it was that that awakened my curiosity about the excessively synthetic drawings of another period. Which are probably to our Japanese prints what a sober Millet is to a Monticelli. You know well enough that I’m not averse to Monticellis, myself. Nor coloured Japanese prints, either, even when people tell me ‘you should get out of that habit’. But it seems to me, at the point we’ve reached, fairly indispensable to know the sober quality that is the equivalent of the colourless Millets. 
     That has little or nothing to do with the stock, properly speaking, which may as well stay as it is. Because I don’t tire of those figures and landscapes. And he has so many of them! If I wasn’t so caught up and absorbed in work, how I’d like to sell all that lot! There’s not much to be earned from it, and that’s why nobody takes it up. Nevertheless, after a few years it will all become quite rare, will be sold more dearly. It’s for that reason that we shouldn’t scorn the small advantage that we have at present, of going through thousands to make our choice. Now, if you give a whole Sunday to this yourself, if you choose new stock for about a hundred francs, you can tell yourself beforehand that you won’t sell those, having chosen them yourself (unless you don’t like them) — you can pay for them as and when, replacing them all the time. In the end, when the whole batch has been paid for at your leisure, you still have as many more in stock. And the result is that what we like best in the lot stays with us. And it’s by doing it this way that, in what’s currently at your place, there are 
   already many old sheets that are worth a good 1 franc each. So I urge you, keep the advantages of the stock and don’t get rid of the fine sheets; on the contrary, we profit by adding to them. There are already some sheets that we have that are definitely worth 5 francs. My God, I wasn’t able to do as I wished, because I was just as excited about this lot of ten thousand Japanese prints to go through as Thoré about a sale of Dutch paintings, among which there were some interesting ones. Really, at present my work has kept me busy; I can’t do any more about it but I recommend Bing’s attic to you. I learned there myself, and I got Anquetin and Bernard to learn with me. Now, there’s still more to learn at Bing’s, and that’s why I urge you to keep our stock there, and access to the attics and cellars, and you see how far I am from seeing it as a speculation. Supposing that it costs (myself, I don’t believe that we’d lose by it), it doesn’t cost an enormous amount. What’s Reid doing??? He’ll already have been there on his own account, perhaps, as will Russell. I didn’t conceal that there were some at Bing’s, only I said they were 5 sous, which Bing himself had told me — or rather, the manager. If you keep the stock, then tell him once again that we often send people directly to him 
   but that he must therefore keep his Japanese prints at the stated price — of 5 sous — not less. I’m telling you only this — I’ve gone through the lot four or 5 times; the sheets at our place are the result of replenishing the stock several times already. Let’s continue in the same way. It has already been a great regret to me, who knows something about the lot, not to have paid at New Year myself, and chosen the new stock myself. Because you’re dazzled, there’s so much of it. And in the other shops — it’s not the same thing at all, because people are afraid to go to Bing, thinking him expensive. Now, what I didn’t go through was the library, where there are hundreds, thousands of bound books. Look, you’ll do well out of paying a visit to their manager — his name continues to escape me — make my profound excuses to him, please, but tell him that I was there three times at New Year to pay up, that afterwards came my journey to the south. And that will procure you a Claude Monet and other paintings, because if you take the trouble to dig out the Japanese prints, you certainly have the right to do exchanges with them, with the painters, for paintings. But to break off our relations with Bing — oh no, never that. Japanese art is something like the primitives, like the Greeks, like our old Dutchmen, Rembrandt, Potter, Hals, Vermeer, Ostade, Ruisdael. It doesn’t end. 
   If, though, I saw Bing’s manager, I’d say to him that when you put yourself out to find collectors for his Japanese prints — you waste your whole day there without thinking about it, and at the end of it all, whether you sell or you don’t sell, you lose money on it. And you, if you don’t want to lose on it, I would urge you to make some exchanges with painters whom you know — as Besnard still owes you a study, to tell the truth. Anyway, that’s perfectly natural, and the difficulty of working in Paris. Today I sent Bernard 6 drawings after painted studies; I promised him 6 more and asked for an exchange of croquis after his painted studies. And there you have it, General Boulanger’s gone and done it again. It seems to me that both of them were right to fight, being unable to get along. That way at least there’s no stagnation, and both of them can only gain by it. Don’t you find he speaks very badly, Boulanger? He makes no impression in words at all. I don’t think him any the less serious for that, since he’ll be in the habit of using his voice for practical purposes, to explain things to his officers or to the managers of arsenals. But he makes no impression at all in public. 
   All the same, it’s a funny city, Paris, where you have to live by wearing yourself out, and as long as you’re not half dead you can’t do a damned thing, and still. I’ve just read Victor Hugo’s L’année terrible. There’s hope there, but —  that hope’s in the stars. I find that true, and well said, and beautiful; and what’s more, I readily believe it myself, too. But let’s not forget that the earth’s a planet too, therefore a star or celestial globe. And what if all these other stars were the same!!!!!! It wouldn’t be very jolly, in fact you’d have to start all over again. For art, now — for which you need time, it wouldn’t be bad to live more than one life. And it’s not without appeal to believe in the Greeks, the old Dutch and Japanese masters, continuing their glorious school on other globes. Anyway, that’s enough for today. And look, there’s another Sunday got through, writing to you and writing to Bernard; however, I must say it didn’t seem long to me. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent If our sisters could bring us some more wood engravings and things like Gavarni’s La masquerade humaine, 100 lithographs, the Charles Keenes, of which there were a good 200, it wouldn’t be bad. There’s also a very fine book, Anatomy for artists. My dear Theo Many thanks for your letter, which gave me great pleasure, coming just at the moment when I was still dazed by the sun and the strain of handling a rather large canvas. I have a new drawing of a garden full of flowers; I also have two painted studies of it. I must send you a rather large new order for canvas and colours. Only it’s not at all urgent. What, if anything, would be urgent would rather be the canvas, seeing that I have a whole lot of stretching frames from which I’ve removed the studies, and on which in the meantime I must put other canvases.  
   You’ll see from this croquis the subject of the new studies; there’s one vertical and one horizontal one of the same subject — no. 30 canvases. There’s definitely a subject for a painting among them — as in some other studies that I have. And truly, I don’t know if I’ll ever do tranquil and calmly worked paintings, myself, as it seems to me that it will always remain disjointed.  Have you any news from Gauguin? I wrote to him again last week, to know how it was going with his health and his work. No reply from Russell, who’s probably not in Paris, judging by what Macknight was saying, who has come back with Boch. Still icy silence about the work when they come. What you say about Princenhage, it’s true that it’s the same story all over again — but when at long last the fellow isn’t there any more, then for his little circle it will be one more emptiness and desolation. And even the rest of us would feel it, because there’s something heartbreaking in the fact that when we were younger we saw so much of him, and we were even influenced by him. 
   So, seeing someone whom one has known as very active reduced to that state of suspicious helplessness and constant suffering, it certainly doesn’t give you an appealing or cheerful notion of human life, and doesn’t add to the joy of living. Our mother in Breda, she must be getting on a bit, too. Without meaning to — is it the effect of nature down here, so Ruisdaelesque? — I quite often think of Holland, and with the double separation of distance and time that has passed, these memories have something heartbreaking about them. What you write about Reid isn’t very cheerful either — at times he used to speak so often of making himself a painter, and of retiring to live with an aunt in the country, that it’s just possible that he’s carrying out this plan now. What does Maria say? But perhaps she’s disappeared too. I believe all the same that the constant wind here must have something to do with the fact that the painted studies have that wild look. Because you also see it in Cézanne. 
         What must make it easier for the Japanese to stuff their works of art into drawers and cupboards is that you can roll kakemonos but not our painted studies, which would eventually flake. Nothing would make it easier for us to place our canvases than to get them widely accepted as decorations in bourgeois homes. As in Holland in the old days. And here in the south it would do a hell of a lot of good to see paintings on the white walls. But go and look: big, coloured Julien medallions9 everywhere — horrors. And alas, we won’t change anything in this state of affairs. However — cafés — perhaps we’ll decorate them later on. More soon, handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, If I was younger I’d certainly feel like suggesting to père Boussod to send us, you and me, to London, without any salary other than 200 francs credit a month, but half of the profit on Impressionist paintings, for which they could deduct this salary of 200. Now — our carcasses are no longer young, and an enterprise to go to London to unearth money for the Impressionists would be a sort of thing in the style of Boulanger, in the style of Garibaldi, in the style of Don Quixote. And besides, père Boussod would really send us packing if we suggested such a thing to him. Only I’d really rather see you go to London than to New York.  My painter’s fingers are loosening up, though, just at the very time my carcass is breaking down. And your head as a dealer, a salesman, another trade that takes long to learn, is gaining in experience. In our position— which is, as you rightly say, so precarious — let’s not forget our advantages, and let’s try to keep our 
   patience for doing well, and our acumen. Is it not, for example, true that in every case it’s still better if they were to say to you one day, go off to London, than to kick you out and not to want your services? I’m ageing faster than you, and what I’m striving for is to be less of a burden to you. Now as far as that goes, if not too monumental a catastrophe occurs, and if it doesn’t rain toads, I hope to achieve that. I’ve just taken thirty or so painted studies off their stretching frames. If in business affairs we looked only for our livelihood — would it be such a great misfortune to go to London — where it seems to me that there’s more chance of selling than elsewhere? In any case, I tell myself that, for example, in the case of the thirty studies that I’ll send you, you won’t be able to sell a single one in Paris. But then again, as our 
  uncle from Princenhage3 used to say, ‘everything sells’. And in our case — what I do isn’t saleable like the Brocharts, say, but it’s saleable to those who buy things because there’s nature in them. Look, a canvas that I cover is worth more than a blank canvas. There — my pretensions go no further — don’t doubt that — my right to paint, my reason for painting, I do have it! It’s only cost me my broken-down carcass — my mind pretty well cracked as far as living as I could and should goes — living like a philanthropist. It’s only cost you, let’s say, around fifteen thousand francs that you’ve advanced me. Now — —.. there’s no reason to make monkeys of us. And that’s the end of my reasoning on the subject of Mister Boussod. Keep your calm and your nerve. 
   And if they talk to you about London — do not say the thing to them bluntly, the way I put it at the beginning of this letter. But you’re right not to contradict the powers that be (what powers!). My dear brother, if I wasn’t all washed up, and driven crazy by this bloody painting, what a dealer I’d still make, with the Impressionists, I mean. But there we are, I’m all washed up. London’s good, London’s just what we need — but alas, I feel I can no longer do what I could have done. But broken as I am, I myself see no misfortune if you were to go to London; if there’s fog, well, it seems to be increasing in Paris, too. What it is — in fact — is that we’ve grown older, and that we’ve got to behave accordingly — none of the rest exists. Now, there’s the pro of this con, and — — we’ll have to turn it to account.
   It seems really strange to me that at present you should have had no news from Gauguin either — and I presume he’s both ill and discouraged.  If I was reminding you just now what painting costs us, it was only to emphasize what it is that we have to say to ourselves, that we’ve gone too far to turn back — and for the rest, I don’t put the emphasis on anything. Because other than material existence, what could be indispensable to me from now on? If G. can’t pay his debt7 nor pay for his journey — If he guarantees me a cheaper life in Brittany — Why should I not, for my part, go and live with him, if we want to help him? If he says ‘I’m alive and well and my talent’s in full flow’ — why should I not say the same thing myself? But there you are, our funds aren’t in full flow. And so what works out least expensive is what we must do. 
   A lot of painting, few expenses is the course we must take. This to repeat once again that I put aside any preference for either the north or the south. All the plans we make have deep-rooted difficulties behind them. How simple it would be with Gauguin — but the move — afterwards — will he still be happy? But as making plans can’t be done, I’m not worrying that the situation is precarious. Knowing it to be such, and feeling it, is what makes us open our eyes and work. If we do things that way and make a balls of it — I dare think it unlikely myself — we’ll be left with something. But look, I declare I’m not expecting anything, when you see people like Gauguin as if up against a wall. Let’s hope there’ll be a way out, for him and for us. 
   If I thought about, if I dwelled on the disastrous possibilities, I could do nothing — I throw myself into work with abandon, I re-emerge from it with my studies; if the storm within roars too loudly, I drink a glass too many to stun myself. It’s being crazy, compared with what one ought to be. But earlier on, I felt less of a painter, painting is becoming a distraction for me, like hunting rabbits for the crazy people who do it to distract themselves. My attention is becoming more intense, my hand steadier. And that’s why I dare almost give you an assurance that my painting will become better. Because that’s all I have left. Have you read in De Goncourt that Jules Dupré also gave them the impression that he was crazy? 
   Jules Dupré had found some art lover who was paying him. If only I could find that, and not be such a burden on you.  After the crisis I went through when I came here, I can no longer make plans or anything else; I’m definitely better now, but hope, the desire to achieve, is broken and I work from necessity, so as not to suffer so much mentally, to distract myself. Yesterday Macknight broke his silence a little by saying he very much liked my last two studies (the flower-garden), and chatting about it for a very long time. Well then — but do you know that if you were in business on your own account, you would perhaps be obliged to look for English connections? This to repeat once again, would it be so great a misfortune to go to London — if, however, it was inevitable, should we be sorry about that? Anyway, there’s no comparison. Except the climate — it’s infinitely better than the Congo. Good handshake, and many thanks for your letter and for the 50-franc note. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, I’m sending you Gauguin’s letter enclosed herewith;1 fortunately he’s regaining his health. How is yours? I’d very much like it if Russell were to do something — however, he has a wife, children, a studio, a house under construction, and I can very well imagine that even a rich man may not always be able to spend 100 francs — were it only that — on paintings. I believe that it would make an enormous difference to me if Gauguin was here, because the days pass now without saying a word to anyone. Ah, well. In any case, his letter gave me tremendous pleasure. Being too long alone in the country you become dull-witted, and not just yet — but this winter, I could become sterile from that. Now this danger will no longer exist if he comes, because we won’t be short of ideas. 
   If work goes well and if we don’t lack guts, there’s the hope of seeing very interesting years in the future. Is Mourier still with you? Would it be possible for me to have your letter on Sunday? I’m not counting on it, though, knowing that it’s the end of the month. It’s just that I’ll probably have a model this week. I have a really great need for some studies of figures. At the moment I have something like an exhibition at my place, in the sense that I’ve taken all the studies off the stretching frames and have nailed them to the wall to finish drying. You’ll see that when there’s a large number of them, and we make a choice among them, it will come to the same thing as if I’d studied them more and worked on them longer. Because to do a subject over and over again on the same canvas or on several canvases comes, in short, to the same degree of seriousness. I’m somewhat rushed, so handshake and  Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your kind letter. If you recall, mine ended with: we’re getting old, that’s what is and the rest is imagination and doesn’t exist. Now, I said that even more for myself, than for you. And I said it feeling the absolute necessity for me to act accordingly, to work, not more, perhaps, but with a more serious conception. Now you talk about the emptiness you sometimes feel; that’s just the same thing that I have, too. Considering, if you will, the times in which we live as a true and great revival of art, the moth-eaten and official tradition, which is still on its feet, but which is at bottom powerless and bone-idle, the new painters, alone, poor, treated like madmen and as a result of this treatment becoming so in fact, at least as far as their social life is concerned.  Then remember that you do exactly the same work as these primitive painters, since you provide them with money and you sell their canvases for them, which enables them to produce others. 
   If a painter ruins his character by working hard at painting, which makes him sterile for many things, for family life, &c. &c. If as a consequence he paints not only with paint but with self-denial and self-abnegation and a broken heart. Not only are you not paid for your own work either, but it costs you exactly the same as this effacement of personality, half deliberate, half accidental, costs a painter. This is to say that if you do painting indirectly, you’re more productive than me, for example. The more completely you become a dealer, the more you become an artist. Just as I very much hope to be in the same case... The more I become dissipated, ill, a broken pitcher, the more I too become a creative artist in that great revival of art of which we’re speaking. These things are indeed so, but this eternally existing art and this revival — this green shoot growing from the roots of the old felled trunk — these are things so spiritual that a kind of melancholy remains with us 
   when we reflect that at less expense we could have made life instead of making art. You really ought, if you can, to make me feel that art is alive, you who perhaps love art more than I do. I say to myself that that doesn’t have to do with art, but with me, that the only way for me to regain self-confidence and tranquillity is by doing better. And here we are again at the end of my last letter — I’m getting old, but it’s only imagination if I were to believe that art is an old, stale thing. Now, if you know what a ‘mousmé’ is (you’ll know when you’ve read Loti’s Madame Chrysanthème), I’ve just painted one. It took me my whole week, I wasn’t able to do anything else, having been not too well again. That’s what annoys me, if I’d been well I’d have knocked off some more landscapes in between times. But in order to finish off my mousmé I had to save my mental powers. A mousmé is a Japanese girl — Provençale in this case — aged between 12 and 14. That makes 2 figures, the Zouave, and her, that I have. 
   Look after your health, take baths, especially if Gruby recommends that you do. Because you’ll see in 4 years, the years by which I’m older than you, how far relative health is necessary in order to be able to work. Now we who work with our heads, our only and unique means of avoiding being finished too soon is the artificial prolongation of modern hygiene, rigorously followed, as far as we can endure it. Because I for one don’t do everything that I should do. And a little good cheer is better than any other remedy. I have a letter from Russell. He says that he would have written to me before had it not been that his move to Belle-Île had absorbed him. He’s there now, and says that he’d be pleased if sooner or later I came to spend some time there. He still wants to do my portrait again. He even says, ‘I would have gone to Boussod’s to see the Gauguin, negresses talking, had it not been that I was prevented from doing so for the same reason’. In short, he’s not refusing to buy one, but is making it understood that he wouldn’t want poorer quality than ours. You see that this is in any case better than nothing at all. 
   I’ll write this to Gauguin and will ask him for croquis of paintings. We shouldn’t push this business and give up on R. for the time being, but consider the thing as an ongoing piece of business that will come off. And the same for Guillaumin, I’d like him to buy a figure by G. He says he’s received a very fine bust of his wife from Rodin, and that on that occasion he lunched with Claude Monet and that he saw the 10 paintings of Antibes then. I’m sending him Geffroy’s article. He makes a very good critique of the Monets, first of all liking them very much: the difficulty attacked, the envelope of coloured air, the colour. Now after that he says, what must be repeated is that it all lacks construction everywhere, for example, with him a tree will have far too much foliage for the size of the trunk, and so always and everywhere, from the point of view of the reality of things, from the point of view of a whole number of laws of nature, he’s pretty well hopeless. He ends by saying that this quality of attacking difficulties is what everyone should have. I’ve received from Bernard 10 croquis12 like his brothel;13 there are 3 of them that are in the style of Redon; the enthusiasm that he has for that I don’t much share myself.
   But there’s a woman washing herself, very Rembrandtesque, or in the style of Goya, and a very strange landscape with figures. He expressly forbids me to send them to you, but you’ll receive them by the same post. I think Russell will buy something else from Bernard. Now I’ve seen work by this Boch; it’s rigorously Impressionist but not powerful, at this moment when this new technique is still preoccupying him too much to allow him to be himself. He’ll become stronger and will bring out his individuality, I think. But Macknight does watercolours of the power of those by Destrée, you know, that vile Dutchman we knew back in the old days. However, he’d washed some small still lifes, yellow jug on purple foreground, red jug on green, orange jug on blue: better, but it’s pretty poor.  The village where they’re staying is pure Millet, small peasants, nothing but that, totally rustic and intimate. That character completely escapes them. I believe that Macknight has civilized and converted to civilized Christianity his lout of a landlord. At least, when you go there that scoundrel and his worthy spouse shake your hand — it’s in a café, of course20 — when you 
     ask for a drink they have ways of refusing the money, ‘Oh, I couldn’t take money from an artiss’ (with two s’s). Anyhow, it’s their own fault that it’s appalling, and this Boch must be getting pretty dull-witted with Macknight. I think Macknight has money, but not much. So they contaminate the village; if it weren’t for that, I’d go there often to work there. What one ought to do there is not talk to civilized people; but they know the stationmaster and a score of bloody nuisances, and that’s largely why they don’t do a damned thing. I’ve already said that to Mourier, who once used to believe that Macknight got on highly intelligently with the ‘man of the fields’. Naturally, these simple and naive people of the fields make fun of them, and despise them. On the contrary, if you do your work there without worrying about the village idlers with their stiff collars, then you can go into the homes of the peasants, enabling them to earn a few sous. And then that bloody Fontvieille would be a treasure to them, but the natives are — Zola’s small peasants, innocent and gentle beings, as we know. It’s likely that Macknight will shortly do little landscapes with sheep, for boxes of sweets. 
   Not just my paintings, but I myself most of all, I had recently become wild-eyed, a bit like Hugo van der Goes in the painting by Emile Wauters. But having had all my beard carefully shaved off, I believe that I have as much of the very placid abbot in the same painting as of the mad painter so intelligently depicted in it. And I’m not unhappy to be somewhere between the two, because you have to live. Especially as there’s no getting away from the fact that one day or another there could be a crisis if you changed as far as your position with the Boussods was concerned. One more reason for maintaining relations with artists on my part as well as on yours. Besides, I believe I’ve told the truth, all the same. If I succeeded in bringing back in prices the money spent, I would be doing no more than my duty. And the practical thing I can do is the portrait. As far as drinking too much goes... I don’t know if it’s bad. But just look at Bismarck, who in any case is very practical and very intelligent. His little doctor told him he was drinking too much and that he’d overtaxed himself all his life, from his stomach to his brain. B. stopped drinking there and then. Since then he’s lost ground and is dragging along. He must really be laughing inside at his doctor, whom fortunately for him he didn’t consult too soon. Anyway, good handshake. Ever yours, Vincent Remember that with Gauguin we should in no way change the idea of coming to his aid if the proposal is acceptable as it stands, but we don’t need him. So, as far as working alone goes, don’t believe that it bothers me, and don’t press the matter for me, be fully assured of that. The portrait of a young girl is on a white background strongly tinted with Veronese green, the bodice is striped blood-red and purple. The skirt is royal blue with large orange-yellow stippling. The matt areas of flesh are yellow grey, the hair purplish, the eyebrows black, and the eyelashes, the eyes orange and Prussian blue; a sprig of oleander between the fingers, because the 2 hands are included. My dear Theo, So at last our uncle’s no longer suffering — I received the news from our sister this morning. It seems that they’re more or less expecting you for the funeral, and perhaps you’ll be there now, in fact. How short life is, and how like smoke. Which isn’t a reason to despise the living — on the contrary. So we’re right to attach ourselves more to artists than to paintings. I’m working hard for Russell. I thought I’d do a series of drawings after my painted studies for him;3 I have a conviction that he’ll look favourably on them, and that, I hope at least, will further prompt him to do a deal. Macknight came to look again yesterday, and also found the portrait of a young girl4 good, and again said that he finds my garden5 good. I really don’t know if he has money or not.
   Now I’m working with another model, a postman in a blue uniform with gold trimmings, a big, bearded face, very Socratic. A raging republican, like père Tanguy. A more interesting man than many people. If we were to push Russell, perhaps he’d purchase the Gauguin that you bought, and if there was no other way of coming to Gauguin’s aid, what would have to be done? When I write to him at the same time as I send the drawings, naturally it will be to get him to make up his mind. I’ll say to him, look, you like our painting so much, but I believe that we’ll see even better by the artist; why don’t you act like us, who have faith in the whole man just as he is, and who find everything he does good. I then want to add, of course it would be all the same to us to let you have the large painting, if necessary, but as Gauguin will still very often be in need of money, 
   in his interests should we not keep it until his prices have tripled or quadrupled — which will happen — we believe? If after that Russell wishes to make a clear, firm offer, well we could see... And in that case, Gauguin should say that he, even though he let you have it at that price as a friend, he himself absolutely does not wish for it to be given to another art lover at that price. Anyway — let’s finish the drawings; I have 8 of them and I’ll do 12, and let’s wait and see what he says. I’m very curious to know if you were able to go to Holland, yes or no. For the moment I won’t write any more. The change that I’m going to try to make in my paintings will be to do more figures. In short, it’s the only thing in painting that moves me deeply and that gives me a sense of the infinite. More than the rest. 
   On the 17th of this month, my friend the second lieutenant of Zouaves will go to Paris. He has offered to take charge of my consignment that I have to make to you, and I believe I’ll accept that; that way you’ll have them, and without costs, on the 18th. I’ll write to our sister today; they’ll all be feeling very sad. Have you received Bernard’s croquis? As our sister says, from the moment that people are no longer there, we remember only their good moments and good qualities. However, it’s above all a question of trying to see them while they’re still there. It would be so simple and would explain so well the horrors of life that now amaze us and distress us so if life had another, second hemisphere, invisible, it’s true, but where we arrive when we breathe our last. To those who are making this interesting and solemn journey, our best wishes and our best sympathies. If you go to Holland, my warm regards to our mother and sister. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent The week will be pretty hard, having to pay the rent and having a model. I hope to make some of these croquis after the painted studies for you too; you’ll see that it has a certain Japanese look. 
   I still have to thank you for yesterday’s 50-franc note, and reply to your letter. You did well to send the colours and canvases, my supplies being exhausted across the board. As far as Bing’s concerned, as for being in a hurry: no. Only far from breaking off relations, we should take more on commission as soon as we can pay. I saw a magnificent and very strange effect this evening. A very large boat laden with coal on the Rhône, moored at the quay. Seen from above it was all glistening and wet from a shower; the water was a white yellow and clouded pearl-grey, the sky lilac and an orange strip in the west, the town violet. On the boat, small workmen, blue and dirty white, were coming and going, carrying the cargo ashore. It was pure Hokusai. It was too late to do it, but one day, when this coal-boat comes back, 
   it’ll have to be tackled. It’s in a railway yard that I saw this effect; it’s a place that I’ve just found and where there will be plenty of other things to do. Handshake, because if I want to write more to Holland I’ll have to hurry. I’ll have difficulty getting all the way through this week. But I hope to get started on the series of figures. My dear Theo, I’m more or less assuming that you went to Holland. From the letter received from our sister I’m somewhat inclined to believe they were expecting you in Holland, also because I haven’t had news from you on this subject. I’ve received a letter from Gauguin in which he talks about painting and complains about not yet having the money needed to come here — but nothing new or different. I sent Russell 12 drawings after painted studies, and so I’ve had an opportunity to talk about it again. We’ll soon be at Michaelmas, and I’ve only rented the house until then;2 should I, yes or no, take it again for a half year, that’s what I’d very much like to decide after Gauguin has seen it, and not without him. I couldn’t pay my rent on the 1st, having a model for the whole week — I have two portraits of the same model on the go, which are more important to me than the rest. But it’s on this occasion, when I was putting my chap4 off till next Monday for the month’s rent, 
   that he said something, that he could find another tenant for the house if I hadn’t decided to keep it. Which doesn’t surprise me much, since I’ve had it repaired myself, and so it’s improved. In my last letter I forgot to reply to you on the subject of Tasset’s new canvas at 5. francs. It’s very fine, and quite what I wanted. If I did a portrait or just something that I’m determined should last, he could depend on my using it. But not much, having just made up my mind to use cheap canvas for the studies. If his consignment hasn’t gone off, I’d be very pleased if you would add to it 4 small tubes of geranium lake. If, that is, I haven’t already ordered that colour, but I believe that in fact I didn’t ask for any bright reds except carmine. So I have two figures on the go now, a head, and a bust with hands, of an old postman in a dark blue uniform. He has a Socratic head that’s interesting to paint.
   There’s no better or shorter way to improve my work than to do figures. Also, I always feel confidence when doing portraits, knowing that that work is much more serious — that’s perhaps not the word — but rather is the thing that enables me to cultivate what’s best and most serious in me. More soon, good handshake. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, It seems to me that you did well to go to our uncle’s funeral, as our mother seemed to expect you. The best way of dying otherwise is to esteem the illustrious departed just as he is, as being the best man in the best of possible worlds, where everything is always for the best. Which being uncontested and thus incontestable, we are then no doubt at liberty to return to our own business afterwards. I’m pleased that our brother Cor has grown bigger and stronger than the two of us. And he’ll be stupid if he doesn’t marry, because he has only that and his hands. With that and his hands, or his hands and that, and what he knows about machines, I for one would like to be in his position if I had any sort of desire to be somebody. Meanwhile, I’m in my skin, and my skin in the gear-wheels of the Beaux-Arts like the grain between the millstones. Did I tell you that I sent some drawings to our friend Russell? At the moment I’m doing the same ones, more or less, for you; there’ll be 12 of them too. You’ll see better then what there is in the painted studies in the way of drawing. I’ve already told you that I always have to struggle against the mistral, which absolutely prevents one being in control of one’s touch. Hence the ‘wild’ look of the studies. You’ll tell me that instead of drawing them I ought to repaint them at home on other canvases. That’s what I sometimes think about, because it’s not my fault that in the case given the execution lacks a more spiritual touch. What would Gauguin say about it if he was here? Would he be in favour of looking for a more sheltered place? I must now tell you something disagreeable again about money; it’s that I won’t manage this week, because this very day I pay 25 francs;6 I’ll have money for 5 days and not for seven. It’s Monday — if I have your next letter on Saturday morning, no need then to increase the contents. 
   Last week I did not only one but even two portraits of my postman, one half-length, with hands, and a life-size head. The chap, not accepting money, was more expensive, eating, drinking with me, and in addition I gave him Rochefort’s La Lanterne. But there you are, a minor and unimportant problem compared with the fact that he posed for it very well, and that I also plan to paint his newborn baby shortly. Because his wife has just given birth. At the same time as the drawings that I have on the go I’ll send you two lithographs by De Lemud, ‘Wine’ and ‘Coffee’;9 in ‘Wine’ there’s a Mephisto character who makes you think a little of C.M. when younger, and in Coffee —.. it’s absolutely Raoul — you know that perpetual old bohemian student type whom I knew last year. What a talent, in the style of Hoffmann or Edgar Poe, this De Lemud has. And yet there’s somebody who’s spoken of so rarely. You’ll perhaps not like these lithographs very much at first glance — but it’s precisely when looking at them longer that they grow on you. I have no more canvas or paint and have already had to buy here. And I have to get even more. So I beg you to send your letter so that I have it on Saturday morning. Today I’m probably going to start on the interior of the café where I’m staying, in the evening, by gaslight. It’s what they call a ‘night café’ here (they’re quite common here), that stay open all night. This way the ‘night prowlers’ can find a refuge when they don’t have the price of a lodging, or if they’re too drunk to be admitted. 
   All these things, family, native country, are perhaps more appealing in the imagination of such as us — who do fairly well without a native country, as well as a family — than in any reality. It always seems to me that I’m a traveller who’s going somewhere and to a destination. If I say to myself, the somewhere, the destination don’t exist at all, that seems well argued and truthful to me. When he kicks somebody out, the brothel-keeper has a logic of the same kind, argues well, too, and is always right. I know that. And at the end of my career I’ll be wrong. So be it. Then I’ll find that not only the fine arts but the rest as well were nothing but dreams, that we were nothing at all ourselves. If we’re as lightweight as that, so much the better for us, as nothing would then stand in the way of the limitless possibility of future existence. Which is why in the present case of our uncle’s death, the dead man’s face was tranquil, serene and grave. When it’s a fact that, while living, he was scarcely like that, neither when young nor when old. So often I’ve noticed an effect like that when looking at a dead man as if to question him. And that’s one proof for me — not the most weighty — of an existence beyond the grave. And a baby in its cradle, also, if you look at it at your ease, has the infinite in its eyes. In fact, I know nothing about it, but precisely this feeling of not knowing makes the real life that we’re living at present comparable to a simple journey by train. You go fast, but you can’t distinguish any object very close up, and above all, you can’t see the locomotive.  It’s rather odd that our uncle, like our father, believed in the future life. Not to mention our father, I’ve heard our uncle debating it several times. 
  Ah — for example, they were more certain than us, and asserted themselves, getting angry if one dared go into it more deeply. I don’t see much of the future life of artists through their works. Yes, artists perpetuate themselves, passing on the torch, Delacroix to the Impressionists, &c.  But is that all? If a kind old mother of a family, with pretty limited ideas that are tormented in the Christian system, were immortal, just as she believes — and this seriously. And I for one in no way deny it. Why should a consumptive or nervous cab-horse, like Delacroix or De Goncourt, with broad ideas though, be any less so? Seeing that it appears that it is precisely the most worn-out people who feel the germ of this indefinable hope. That’s enough, what’s the use of worrying about it? But living in the heart of civilization, in the heart of Paris and the heart of the fine arts, why shouldn’t one keep this self of an old woman? If women themselves, without their instinctive belief in an ‘it’s there’, wouldn’t find the strength to create and to act? Then the doctors will tell us that not only Moses, Mohammed, Christ, Luther, Bunyan and others were mad, but also Frans Hals, Rembrandt, Delacroix and all the good, narrow-minded old ladies like our mother as well. Ah — that’s serious, that is. We could ask these doctors, where, then, are the sensible people? Are they, the brothel-keepers, always in the right? It’s probable. What to choose, then? Fortunately we don’t have to choose. Handshake and Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve just sent off 3 large drawings, as well as some other, smaller ones1 and the two lithographs by De Lemud. The vertical small farmhouse garden is, it seems to me, the best of the three large ones. The one with the sunflowers is the little garden of a bathhouse. The third, horizontal, garden is the one of which I’ve also done some painted studies. Under the blue sky, the orange, yellow, red patches of flowers take on an amazing brilliance, and in the limpid air there’s something happier and more suggestive of love than in the north. It vibrates — like the bouquet by Monticelli that you have. I’m annoyed with myself for not painting flowers here. Anyway, even having already produced about fifty drawings or painted studies here, I feel as though I’ve done absolutely nothing at all. I’d gladly content myself with being nothing but a pioneer for other, future painters who’ll come to work in the south. Now the harvest, the garden, the sower9 and the two seascapes10 are croquis after painted studies. I believe that all these ideas are good, but the painted studies lack clarity of touch. One more reason why 
   I felt the need to draw them. I wanted to paint a little old peasant who had an enormous resemblance to our father in his features. Only he was more common, and verged on caricature. Nevertheless, I would have been enormously keen to do him just as he was as a little peasant. He promised to come, and then he said that he ought to have the painting for himself, and so I had to do two the same, one for him and one for me. I told him no. Perhaps he’ll come back some day. I’m curious to know if you knew the De Lemuds. At the moment there are still plenty of fine lithographs to be had, Daumiers, reproductions of Delacroix, Decamps, Diaz, Rousseau, Dupré, &c. Soon, though, it’ll be over, and what a great pity that this art tends to disappear. Why is it that we don’t hold on to what we have, the way doctors and mechanics do? Once something has been discovered and found, they keep the knowledge of it; in these wretched fine arts we forget everything, we hold on to nothing. 
   Millet gave us the essence of the peasant, and now, yes, there’s Lhermitte, it’s true there are one or two more, Meunier and have we now more generally learned how to see peasants — no, hardly anyone knows how to polish one off. Isn’t it partly the fault of Paris and the Parisians, fickle and disloyal like the sea? Well then, you’re damned right to say, let’s go quietly on our way, working for ourselves. You know, whatever becomes of sacrosanct Impressionism, I’d still myself have the wish to do the things that the previous generation, Delacroix, Millet, Rousseau, Diaz, Monticelli, Isabey, Decamps, Dupré, Jongkind, Ziem, Israëls, Meunier, a heap of others, Corot, Jacque... could understand. Ah, Manet was really really close to it, and Courbet, to marrying form and colour. Me, I’d be quite happy to stay silent for 10 years doing nothing but studies, then do one or two figure paintings. The old plan, so often recommended and so rarely carried out. 
   If the drawings that I send you are too stiff, it’s because I did them in such a way as to be able later, if they’re still there, to use them as information for painting. This vertical small farmhouse garden is superbly coloured in reality. The dahlias are a rich and dark purple, the double row of flowers is pink and green on one side and orange almost without greenery on the other. In the middle a low, white dahlia and a little pomegranate tree, with flowers of the most brilliant orange red, yellow-green fruit, the ground grey, the tall reeds — ‘canes’ — of a blue green, the fig trees emerald, the sky blue, the houses white with green windows, red roofs. In full sun in the morning, in the evening entirely bathed in shadow cast by the fig trees and reeds. If Quost was there, or Jeannin What can you say, to encompass everything you’d need an entire school of people working together in the same area, complementing each other like the old Dutch: portrait painters, genre painters, landscape painters, painters of animals, still-life painters. 
   Must also tell you that I made a very interesting tour round the farms with someone who knows the area. But you know that in the real Provence it’s more often small peasant farming à la Millet than anything else. Macknight and Boch don’t understand much of it, or rather, nothing. Now if I myself am beginning to see it a bit more clearly, I’d need a good long stay to do it. At times it nevertheless seems likely to me that I’ll have to make the journey myself if Gauguin doesn’t manage to sort out the mess he’s in, if we want to put the plan into practice. And then so be it, I’m still among peasants anyway, it’s the same. It’s even my opinion that we should try to keep ourselves ready to go to him, because I believe that he could soon be in terrible straits again if, for example, his landlord won’t give him any more credit. That’s so predictable, and his distress could be so great that it might be urgent to put the partnership into practice. For me there’s only the one-way journey, and the prices over there that he has mentioned are in any case considerably lower than what one inevitably spends here. 
   I’m counting on having your letter on Saturday morning. I’ve bought two more canvases, so I now have just 5 francs left, and it’s already Wednesday evening. Here, in days with no money, there’s just one more advantage over the north, the fine weather (because even the mistral is fine weather to look at). Really glorious sunshine, in which Voltaire dried himself off while drinking his coffee. You can’t help feeling Zola and Voltaire everywhere. It’s so full of life! In the style of Jan Steen, in the style of Ostade. There would certainly be the possibility of a school of painting here. But you’ll say that nature is beautiful everywhere if one goes into it deeply enough. Have you read Madame Chrysanthème yet, have you made the acquaintance of that pimp ‘of a surprising courtesy’, Monsieur Kangourou? And of the sugared peppers, the fried ices and the salted sweets? I’ve been very, very well these last few days; in the long run I believe that I’ll belong to these parts in all respects. In the peasant’s garden I saw the figure of a woman carved in wood, originally from the prow of a Spanish ship. 
   It was in a grove of cypresses, and it was pure Monticelli. Ah, these farmhouse gardens with the lovely big red Provence roses, the vines, the fig trees; it’s quite poetic, and the eternal strong sun, in spite of which the foliage stays very green. The tank, out of which clear water flows that irrigates the farm through channels forming a little canal system. An old, pure white Camargue horse drives the machinery. No cows on these little farms. My neighbour and his wife (grocers) strongly resemble the Buteaux, for example. But here, farmhouse and cheap grog-shops are less gloomy, less tragic than in the north, because the heat &c. makes poverty less hard and melancholy. I’d so much like you to have seen this part of the country. Well, first we’ll have to see how the Gauguin business turns out. I haven’t told you yet that I’ve had a letter from Koning; I wrote to him a week ago. I can easily see him coming back sometime. Is Mourier still there? I’d be quite surprised if that book by Cassagne was no longer in existence. They’d certainly know it at Latouche’s or at the artists’ colourman in Chaussée d’Antin. Or know where it is. 
   If I should ever happen to give drawing lessons, or have to talk with painters about the principles of technique, I’ll have to have it to hand. It’s THE ONLY genuinely practical book that I know, and I know a little from experience how useful it is. Mourier, Macknight, even Boch, all of them would need it, and how many others. Macknight keeps coming. I’ve worked again on a figure of a Zouave, sitting on a bench against a white wall, which makes the fifth figure. This morning I was at a washing-place with figures of women as broad as Gauguin’s negresses.  One in particular, in white-black-pink. Another all yellow; there were a good thirty of them, young and old. I hope to send you still more croquis of painted studies. Hoping to have news from you soon. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I thank you very much for sending the canvas and the colours, which have just arrived. This time there was carriage of 9. francs to pay, so I won’t go to collect them until after I’ve received your next letter, as I don’t have the money at the moment. But we’ll have to check whether Tasset, who in most cases pays postage and certainly then shows postage on his invoice, hasn’t done so in this case. Also, I paid 5. francs for the last consignment but one, and so if carriage charges are shown on the last invoice but one, it would be too much. Now if he’d made 2 separate consignments (the cost of carriage is usually about 3 francs), there should only be 5. francs to pay for this consignment. Provided I don’t paint anything on these 10 metres of canvas but masterpieces measuring half a metre, which I’ll sell for cash and at an exorbitant price to the distinguished art lover of rue de la Paix3 — nothing should be easier — than to earn a lot of money with this consignment. 
   I think it’s likely that we’re going to have great heat now, with no wind, the wind having blown for 6 weeks. In that case, it’s excellent that I have colours and canvases in stock, because I can already spot half a dozen subjects, especially this little farmhouse garden of which I sent you the drawing yesterday. I think about Gauguin a lot, and I assure you that one way or another, whether it’s he who comes here, or I who go to him, he and I will both like more or less the same subjects. I’ve no doubts about being able to work at Pont-Aven, and on the other hand, am convinced that he’ll like this scenery here enormously. Ah well, at the end of a year, even giving you one canvas a month, which will make a dozen a year in all, he’ll still have made money, not having run up debts during this year, and having produced without interruption he’ll lose nothing. While the money that he’ll have received from us will be to a large extent recovered through the savings that become possible if we live at home at the studio, he and I, instead of living in cafés. 
   The fact remains that provided we lived in harmony and with an understanding not to quarrel, we’d gain a firmer position as far as reputation goes.  Each of us living alone, we live like madmen or criminals, in appearance at least, and to some extent in reality, too. I’m happier to feel my old strength coming back than I would have thought I could be. I owe that largely to the people at the restaurant where I eat these days, who are extraordinary. I have to pay there, of course, but it’s something you don’t find in Paris, that they actually give you something to eat for your money. And I’d very much like to see Gauguin there too, for a fair length of time. What Gruby says — do without women and eat well — it’s true that does you good, and if you spend your brains and your marrow working with your mind, it’s very logical not to spend yourself making love any more than necessary. But that’s easier to do in the country than in Paris. Is the desire for women that one picks up in Paris not in part the effect of the malady of nervous exhaustion itself, of which Gruby is the sworn enemy, rather than a sign of vigour? So one sees this desire disappear at the very moment when one is recovering. The root of the problem being found in our very constitution, in the inevitable weakening of families from generation to generation, in our lousy profession as well, and the sad Paris life; the root of the problem indeed lies there, and we seem unable to cure ourselves of it. 
   I believe that the day when you’d no longer have to do idiotic accounting and ridiculously complicated administration at the Goupils, you’ll gain a great deal in terms of power with art lovers; it’s a thing cursed a thousand times, these complicated administrative tasks, and there isn’t, I imagine, a single brain, a single clerk’s temperament that doesn’t lose 50% in them. In that, our uncle5 was quite right when he said: much work with few staff, and not little work with many. Unfortunately for him, he got caught up in the gear-wheels himself. Working among people, in order to sell, it’s a job that requires observation, a cool head.  But if one is forced to give too much attention to the books, one loses self-confidence. That’s why Tersteeg was fortunate to have that greedy swine Iterson at his side, who carries this troublesome load of mechanical administration for him. I would really like to know just how you are. Anyway, as long as the Impressionists produce fine things, and find friends, there’s always a chance and possibility of a more independent position for you later on. A pity that it can’t exist right now. Isn’t it true that in this business with Gauguin, with him spending 2. a day (at least, I think I recall that he mentioned that amount, he or Bernard), we know for a firm fact the price of a day at the hotel there, while here it still remains to be seen. So at the price there we’re sure of being able to stay within the limits proposed. 
   About health, now; mine is basically even good enough for the north, these days. Assumption, therefore, that he can’t find the money; let’s not hesitate. In fact, we’re only tying ourselves up in this business for a year, let’s say. Still no letter from Russell, but he’s bound to reply, having doubtless received the drawings. This restaurant where I am is very odd, it’s grey all over, the floor is of grey bitumen, like a pavement, grey paper on the wall. Green blinds, always closed. A big green curtain in front of the ever-open door stops the dust coming in.  It’s altogether a Velázquez grey, as in women spinning.  Not even the very narrow and very violent shaft of sunlight through a blind, like the one that falls across V’s painting, is missing. Of course, small tables with white cloths. Now behind this Velázquez-grey room you can see the old kitchen, clean as a Dutch kitchen; very red brick floor, green vegetables, oak cupboard, cooking- stoves with gleaming copperware, with blue and white tiles and the big, bright orange fire.
   Now there are two women who serve, also in grey, more or less like the painting by Prévost that you have at home, really comparable in every respect.  In the kitchen, an old woman and a short, fat, serving-woman, also in grey, black, white. I don’t know if I’m describing it clearly enough, but that’s what I’ve seen here of real Velázquez. In front of the restaurant, a covered courtyard, paved with red bricks, and on the walls, vines growing wild, convolvulus and climbing plants. It’s still the real old Provence style, while the other restaurants are so much on Paris lines that even though there’s no concierge of any sort there’s still her lodge, and the notice, ‘speak to the concierge’. So not everything is brilliantly coloured all the time. For example, I saw a cowshed with 4 cows the colour of café au lait, and a calf the same colour, the cowshed a blue white, covered in cobwebs, the cows very clean and very beautiful, a big green curtain, against dust and flies, in the outside door. Grey too, Velázquez grey.  There was a tranquillity about it — this café au lait and tobacco brown of the cows’ hides, with the soft white bluish grey of the walls, the green curtain and the yellow and sparkling green of the sunny exterior making a brilliant contrast. You see how there are other things still to do, quite different from what I’ve done.  I have to go to work. I saw another very tranquil and quite beautiful thing the other day, a young girl with a café au lait complexion — if I remember rightly — ash-blonde hair, grey eyes. Bodice of pale printed calico, under which you could see her high, firm little breasts. This against the emerald foliage of the fig trees. A real countrywoman, a great virginal look. Not completely impossible that I might have her pose in the open air, and her mother as well — a gardener — colour of earth, who was thus dirty yellow and faded blue. The young girl’s café au lait complexion was darker than the pink of her bodice. The mother was marvellous, her dirty yellow and faded blue figure stood out in the full sun against a brilliant square of snow-white and lemon-yellow flowers. A real Vermeer of Delft, then. It’s not ugly, the south. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I have to thank you for quite a few things, first of all your letter and the 50-franc note it contained, but then also for the consignment of colours and canvas that I’ve been to collect at the station (the geranium lake arrived too), and lastly for the Cassagne book2 and for La fin de Lucie Pellegrin. If Tasset divided up his packages better there’d be a difference in the cost of carriage; this time it came to 3 parcels, two of them weighing over 5 kilos. If a few tubes had been kept back, the whole thing would have cost about 5 francs. Anyway, I’m still very glad to have them. Lucie Pellegrin is very beautiful, it’s straight from the life, and it’s still elegant, and it’s touching, because it keeps the broad human aspect. Why should it be forbidden to deal with these subjects? Unhealthy and over-excited sexual organs seek sensual pleasures, delights à la Da Vinci. Not I, on the other hand, who have hardly seen any but the sort of 2-franc women originally intended for the Zouaves. But people who have leisure for making love look for mystery of the Da Vincian sort. I understand that these loves won’t always be understood by everyone. 
   But from the point of view of what is permitted, books could actually be written dealing with more serious deviations of unhealthy sex than the practices of Lesbians; just as it’s also permitted to write medical documents, surgical descriptions, on those matters. Anyway, law and justice apart, a pretty woman is a living marvel, while a painting by Da Vinci or Correggio only exists on other accounts. Why am I so little an artist that I always regret that the statue, the painting, aren’t alive? Why do I understand the musician better, why do I see more clearly the raison d’être of his abstractions? At the first opportunity I’ll send you an engraving after a drawing by Rowlandson of two women, as beautiful as Fragonard or Goya. At the moment we have a very glorious, powerful heat here, with no wind, which suits me very well. Sunshine, a light which, for want of a better word I can only call yellow — pale sulphur yellow, pale lemon, gold. How beautiful yellow is! And how much better shall I see the north. Ah, I’m always wishing that the day will come when you’ll see and feel the sun of the south. As far as studies go, I have two studies of thistles on a piece of waste ground, thistles white with the fine dust from the road. And a little study of a halting-place of fairground people, red and green caravans, and also a little study 
   of carriages of the Paris-Lyon-Mediterranée, which last two studies have been approved as ‘in quite the modern key’ by the young follower of good old General Boulanger, the very brilliant second lieutenant of Zouaves. This gallant soldier has given up the art of drawing, into the mysteries of which I was making efforts to initiate him, but for a plausible reason, because unexpectedly he had to take an examination, for which I fear he was anything but prepared. Supposing that the above-mentioned young Frenchman always tells the truth, he’ll have astonished the examiners with the self-confidence of his answers, a confidence that he seems to have boosted by spending the night before the examination in a brothel. As I believe François Coppée says in a sonnet, on the subject of ‘my lieutenant on his way’, we may have ‘a doubt that fills us with despair’. For, continues Coppée ‘I think of our defeat’. The fact remains that I have no reason to complain of him, and if it’s true that he’ll soon be a lieutenant, we should acknowledge his good fortune. He literally resembles the good old General from the point of view of having spent a great deal of time with the good so-called ladies of the café-concert. 
   It’ll be enough that I’ll write to you, or he’ll send you a telegram to tell you by which train he’ll arrive on the 16 or the 17. He’ll give you the painted studies then, which will save us carriage charges. He owes me that much, anyway, for my lessons. He’ll do no more than spend one or two days in Paris on his way to the north, but on his return he’ll stay there longer.  It is indeed, after so much coldness, rather kind of our uncle to have left you a legacy, but it’s hard for me to get it into my head that he and C.M. haven’t condemned you a little to forced labour in perpetuity by refusing to provide for you by lending you the capital needed to set up on your own. That remains a serious error on their part. But I don’t labour the point. One more reason to try to do the most possible in art if we’ll always be in difficulties, relatively speaking, as far as money goes. Well, my dear brother, at that moment you were ready, for your part, to set yourself up; therefore you have every right to feel that you’ve done your duty, for your part. With their help, you had this business in the Impressionists, taken as a whole. Without their help, the business won’t be done, or will be done in a different way. You may not have earned anything, but you’ve deserved it, now if the Dutch are always mixing up these two such different questions, having only their word ‘verdienen’ in both cases, too bad for them!14 I’ll write another short line to Mourier, you’ll read it. And I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, Yesterday I spent the evening with that second lieutenant, and he plans to leave here on Friday, then he’ll stay one night in Clermont, and from Clermont he’ll send you a telegram to tell you by which train he’ll be arriving. Sunday morning, in all probability. The roll that he’ll bring you contains 36 studies;1 among them there are many with which I’m desperately dissatisfied, and which I’m sending you anyway because it will still give you a vague idea of some really fine subjects in the countryside. For example, there’s a quick sketch I made of myself laden with boxes, sticks, a canvas, on the sunny Tarascon road;2 there’s a view of the Rhône, in which the sky and the water are the colour of absinthe, with a blue bridge and black figures of ruffians;3 there’s the sower, a washing-place5 and still others, not at all successful and unfinished, especially a large landscape with brushwood.
   What’s happened to the Souvenir de Mauve? Having heard no more about it, I was inclined to believe that Tersteeg may have said something disagreeable to you, to let you know that it would be refused, or some other unpleasantness. Naturally, I wouldn’t get worked up about it in that case. At the moment I’m working on a study like this:  boats seen from a quay, from above; the two boats are a purplish pink, the water is very green, no sky, a tricolour flag on the mast. A workman with a wheelbarrow is unloading sand. I have a drawing of it too. Did you receive the three drawings of the garden? They’ll end up by not taking them at the post office any more, because the format’s too big. I fear that I won’t have a very fine female model. She had promised, then as it appears, she earned a few sous with 
         some riotous living and has better things to do. She was extraordinary; her expression was like that of Delacroix. And a strange, primitive bearing. I take things with patience, for want of seeing other ways of enduring them, but it’s annoying, this constant aggravation with models. I hope to do a study of oleanders in the next few days. If we painted smoothly like Bouguereau people wouldn’t be ashamed to let themselves be painted, but I believe it’s made me lose models, that people found that it was ‘badly done’, it was only pictures full of painting that I was doing. So the good whores are afraid of being compromised, and that people will laugh at their portraits. But it’s enough to make you almost lose heart when you feel that you could do things if people had more good will. I can’t resign myself to saying, ‘grapes are sour’;12 I can’t get over the fact that I don’t have more models. Well, we must be patient and look for others. Now our sister will come soon to spend some time with you; I have no doubt that she’ll enjoy herself.
    It’s a rather sad prospect to have to say to myself that the painting I do will perhaps never have any value. If it was worth what it costs I could say to myself, I’ve never concerned myself about money. But in the present circumstances, on the contrary, one will soak it up. Ah well, and all the same, we must still continue and try to do better. It very often seems wiser to me to go to Gauguin instead of recommending to him the life down here; I so much fear that in the end he’ll complain of having been inconvenienced. Will it be possible to live at home here, will we manage to make ends meet? Because that’s a new venture. In Brittany, now, we can calculate what it will cost, and here I have no idea. I continue to find life quite expensive, and you don’t get very far with the people. Here there would be beds and some pieces of furniture to buy, and the expenses of his journey and everything he owes. That seems to me to risk more than is proper, when he and Bernard spend so little in Brittany. Well, we’ll have to make up our minds soon, and for my part I have no preferences. It’s a simple question of deciding where we have the most chance of living cheaply. 
   I must write to Gauguin today to ask him what he pays models, and to find out if there are any. There you are, if you’re getting old, it’s important to rule out what is an illusion and to calculate before jumping into things. And if when you’re younger you’re able to believe that you can meet your needs through diligent work, it becomes more and more doubtful now. I also told Gauguin that in my last letter. That if we painted like Bouguereau, that we could then hope to earn — but that the public will never change and only likes soft and smooth things. With a more austere talent, you can’t depend on the product of your labours; most of the people intelligent enough to understand and love Impressionist paintings are and will remain too poor to buy. Will Gauguin or I work less for that — no — but we’ll be obliged to accept poverty and social isolation as a prior condition. And to start with, let’s set ourselves up where living costs the least. So much the better if success comes, so much the better if one day we found ourselves better off. 
   What touches me most deeply in Zola’s L’oeuvre is that character Bongrand-Jundt. It’s so true what he says: You believe, unfortunate souls, that when the artist has mastered his talent and gained his reputation, that then he’s home and dry?  On the contrary, from that moment on he isn’t allowed to produce a thing that isn’t good in every way. His very reputation obliges him to take all the more care over his work as chances of sales diminish. At the least sign of weakness the whole jealous pack falls on him and destroys precisely that reputation and that faith that a fickle and treacherous public briefly had in him. Stronger than that is what Carlyle says. You know the fireflies in Brazil that are so luminous that in the evening ladies stick them into their hair with pins. It’s very fine, fame, but see, it is to the artist what the hairpin is to those insects. You wish to succeed and shine; do you really know what you want? Now I have a horror of success; I’m afraid of the morning after following a success by the Impressionists; even the present difficult days will later seem like ‘the good times’ to us. Well, Gauguin and I must look ahead, we must work at getting a roof over our heads, beds; the essentials, in short, to endure the siege by failure that will last the whole of our life.
   And we must settle down in the least expensive place. Then we’ll have the peace of mind needed to produce a large amount, even if we sell little or nothing. But if expenses exceeded income, we’d be wrong to hope too much that everything would work out through the sale of our paintings. On the contrary, we’d be obliged to part with them at any price at the wrong time.  I conclude. Living more or less like monks or hermits, with work as our ruling passion, giving up well-being. Nature, the fine weather down here, that’s the advantage of the south. But I believe that Gauguin will never give up the battle of Paris; he has that too much at heart, and believes in a lasting success more than I do. That won’t do me any harm; on the contrary, perhaps I despair too much. So let’s leave him this illusion, but let’s be aware that what he’ll always need is lodgings, and his daily bread, and paint. That’s where the chink in his armour is, and it’s because he’s getting into debt now that he’ll be done for beforehand. By coming to his aid, the two of us make his victory in Paris possible, in fact. 
   If I had the same ambitions as he has, we probably wouldn’t get on well together. But I don’t care about my success nor about my happiness, I care about the continuation of the energetic undertakings of the Impressionists, I care about this question of a refuge and of daily bread for them. And I feel it a crime that I have that, while two can live on the same amount. If you’re a painter, you’re taken either for a madman or for a rich man. A cup of milk costs you one franc, a slice of bread and butter two, and paintings don’t sell. That’s why we have to join together as the old monks did, the Brethren of the Common Life of our Dutch heathlands. I realize already that Gauguin hopes for success — he couldn’t do without Paris, he doesn’t foresee the infinity of poverty. You understand how far in these circumstances it’s absolutely one and the same to me to stay here or to leave. We have to allow him to fight his battle. He’ll win it, what’s more. Too far from Paris, he would think himself idle. But for ourselves let’s keep a total indifference regarding success or failure. I’d begun to sign my canvases, but I soon stopped; it seemed too silly to me. On a seascape there’s a very outrageous red signature, because I wanted a red note in the green. You’ll see them soon, anyway. Weekend will be a bit tough, so I hope to have your letter a day early rather than a day late. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent    Paris Arles 664 18 15 2h30 s milliet will deliver paintings friday morning 7 o’clock sharp cercle militaire1 avenue opéra vincent    My dear Theo You’ll have received my telegram informing you that Second Lieutenant Milliet will arrive in Paris on Friday morning; he arrives at the Gare de Lyon at 5. in the morning and from there goes directly to the Cercle Militaire, avenue de l’Opéra. It will be easiest for both of you if you go to see him there at 7 sharp in the morning. Of course, you could also meet him at the Gare de Lyon itself, but first of all it’s further away, then you’d have to get up quite early. He has been very kind to me, particularly these past few days. He’ll come back to Paris for a week, but is spending the major part of his holidays in the north. I’m very glad to see the package sent off, and in this way our sister will see my studies, which isn’t a matter of indifference to me, because in this way she’ll also experience a thing that is after all an essential part of our French life, raw and just as it is. 
   I mean, she’ll see painting in its rough state. But do me the great pleasure of showing her one or two studies put back on stretching frames and framed in white. You can take the previous ones off their stretching frames and frames. And so that they don’t take up too much room, don’t encumber yourself with stretching frames and frames for me. Because the pals will see clearly what it’s like just as it is, and you too, most of all. Later — when we’ve reached the Hundred mark, we’ll choose around twelve or fifteen of them to frame. Now, I’ve kept the large portrait of the postman, and his head enclosed herewith is — a single sitting. Well, there you are, there’s my strong point, to do a chap roughly in one sitting. If, my dear brother, I let myself get more carried away, I’d always do that, I’d drink with the first person to come along and I’d paint him — and not in 
   watercolours but in oils, on the spot, like Daumier. If I did a hundred like that there’d be some good ones among them. And I’d be more French and more myself — and more of a drinker. It tempts me so much — not the drink, but painting ruffians. Would I lose as a man what I gained as an artist, doing that? If I had faith in that, I’d be a famous madman — now I’m not a famous one — but you see I don’t have enough ambition for that particular kind of fame to put the match to the powder. I prefer to wait for the generation to come, which will do in portraits what Claude Monet is doing in landscape, the rich, bold landscape in the style of Guy de Maupassant.  Now I know that I myself am not one of those people, but didn’t the Flauberts and Balzacs make the Zolas and Maupassants? So here’s to — not us — but the generation to come. 
   You’re enough of a judge of painting to see and to appreciate what originality I may have, and you’re also enough of a judge to see the pointlessness of presenting to today’s public what I’m doing, because the others surpass me in more precise brushwork. It has more to do with the wind and circumstances than with what I could do without the mistral, and without these inevitable circumstances of vanished youth and relative poverty. For my part, I’m in no way set on changing my situation, and I actually count myself only too happy to be able to continue as it is. No reply from our friend Russell, and Gauguin fully deserved one, for sure. I’ve added to this consignment a drawing of the painting that I’m working on now; the boats with man unloading sand. If some studies weren’t quite dry, it would just be too bad for them; they should be allowed to dry completely, then washed with lots of water and retouched if need be. But the damage can’t be serious, and it was a good opportunity to send them. I shake your hand firmly, and I do hope to have news from you on Friday or Saturday. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, You’ll shortly make the acquaintance of Mr Patience Escalier — a sort of man with a hoe, an old Camargue oxherd, who’s now a gardener at a farmstead in the Crau. Today without fail I’ll send you the drawing I made after this painting, as well as the drawing of the portrait of Roulin the postman. The colour of this portrait of a peasant isn’t as dark as the Nuenen potato eaters — but the very civilized Parisian, Portier, probably so-called because he kicks paintings out of the door — will find himself up against the same question again. You’ve now changed since then, but you’ll see that he hasn’t changed, and really it’s a pity that there aren’t more paintings in clogs5 in Paris. I don’t believe that my peasant will do any harm, for example, to the Lautrec that you have, and I dare even believe that the Lautrec will, by simultaneous contrast, become even more distinguished, and mine will gain from the strange juxtaposition, because the sunlit and burnt, weather-beaten quality of the strong sun and strong air will show up more clearly beside the face powder and stylish outfit. What a mistake that Parisians haven’t acquired sufficient taste for rough things, for Monticellis, for barbotine. Well, I know that one shouldn’t be discouraged because utopia isn’t coming about. It’s just that I find that what I learned in Paris is fading, and that I’m returning to my ideas that came to me in the country before I knew the Impressionists. And I wouldn’t be very surprised if the Impressionists were soon to find fault with my way of doing things, which was fertilized more by the ideas of Delacroix than by theirs. 
   Because instead of trying to render exactly what I have before my eyes, I use colour more arbitrarily in order to express myself forcefully. Well, let’s let that lie as far as theory goes, but I’m going to give you an example of what I mean. I’d like to do the portrait of an artist friend who dreams great dreams, who works as the nightingale sings, because that’s his nature. This man will be blond. I’d like to put in the painting my appreciation, my love that I have for him. I’ll paint him, then, just as he is, as faithfully as I can — to begin with. But the painting isn’t finished like that. To finish it, I’m now going to be an arbitrary colourist.  I exaggerate the blond of the hair, I come to orange tones, chromes, pale lemon. Behind the head — instead of painting the dull wall of the mean room, I paint the infinite. I make a simple background of the richest, most intense blue that I can prepare, and with this simple combination, the brightly lit blond head, against this rich blue background achieves a mysterious effect, like a star in the deep azure. Similarly, I’ve proceeded in this way in the peasant’s portrait. However, without wishing to evoke the mysterious brilliance of a pale star in the infinite blue in this case. 
   But imagining the terrific man I had to do, in the very furnace of harvest time, deep in the south. Hence the oranges, blazing like red-hot iron, hence the old gold tones, glowing in the darkness. Ah, my dear brother — — and the good folk will see only caricature in this exaggeration. But what does that do to us, we’ve read La terre and Germinal, and if we paint a peasant we’d like to show that this reading has in some way become part of us. I don’t know if I’ll be able to paint the postman as I feel him; as a revolutionary this man is like père Tanguy, he’s probably considered a good republican because he heartily detests the republic we currently enjoy, and because, in short, he’s a little dubious and a little disillusioned with the republican idea itself. But one day I saw him singing the Marseillaise — and I thought I was seeing ’89, not next year, but the one 99 years ago. It was something out of Delacroix, out of Daumier, out of the old Dutch painting entirely. Unfortunately, it’s impossible to get that in a pose, and yet you need an intelligent model to be able to do the painting. I must tell you now that materially speaking, these days are extremely hard. Whatever I do, living is pretty expensive here, more or less like Paris, where, while spending 5 or 6 francs a day, you don’t have much. If I have models, then I suffer considerably as a result. Doesn’t matter. And so I’ll go on. 
   So I assure you that if by chance you sometimes sent me a little more money, that would benefit the paintings, but not me. Myself, I only have the choice between being a good painter or a bad one. I choose the former. But the things needed for painting are like those of a ruinous mistress; you can do nothing without money, and you never have enough of it. And so painting should be done at society’s expense, and the artist shouldn’t be overburdened by it. But there you are, we should keep quiet once again, because nobody is forcing us to work, indifference towards painting being, inevitably, fairly general, fairly eternal. Fortunately my stomach has recovered to such an extent that I lived for 3 weeks of the month on ship’s biscuits with milk, eggs. It’s the good heat that gives me strength, and I definitely wasn’t wrong to go to the south now instead of waiting until the damage was irreparable. Yes, I’m as well now as other men, which I have only been briefly — in Nuenen, for example — and that’s not disagreeable. By ‘other men’ I mean a bit like the road-menders on strike, père Tanguy, père Millet, the peasants. If you’re well, you should be able to live on a piece of bread, while working the whole day long, and still having the strength to smoke and to drink your glass; you need that in these conditions.  And still to feel the stars and the infinite, clearly, up there. Then life is almost magical, after all. Ah, those who don’t believe in the sun down here are truly blasphemous. Unfortunately, along with the sun, dear God, for 3 quarters of the time there’s the devil of a mistral. Saturday’s post has gone by, damn it, and I didn’t doubt but that I would receive your letter, but you can see that I’m not getting upset about it. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo Many thanks for your kind letter and for the 100-franc note that was included with it. And you’re very kind to promise Gauguin and me to put us in a position to carry out the partnership project. I’ve just received a letter from Bernard, who joined Gauguin, Laval and someone else at Pont-Aven several days ago. In this letter, which is very kind by the way, there isn’t, however, a syllable about whether Gauguin intends joining me, nor another syllable, moreover, asking me to go there. All the same, the letter was very friendly. From Gauguin himself, not a word for almost a month. I personally believe that Gauguin prefers to manage with his friends in the north, and if by good luck he sells a painting, or several, he could have ideas other than those of joining me. Do I, who have less desire than he does for the battle of Paris, 
   not have the right to do as I please? Look here: The day when you could, would you — not give me, but lend me 300 francs for a year, all at one go? Then if I reckon that at present you’re sending me 250 francs a month, you wouldn’t send me more than 200 after that, until the 300 paid out all at once had been paid off. Then I’d buy two good beds, complete, at 100 francs each, and other furniture for 100 francs. That would put me in a position to sleep at home, and to be able to put up Gauguin or another person there as well. That would give me a saving of 300 francs a year, because it’s still 1 franc a night that I’m paying to the lodging-house keeper. I’d have the sense of a more permanent home, and really it’s a condition for being able to work. That wouldn’t increase my outgoings over the year, but it would give me furniture and the possibility of managing to make ends meet. 
   So, if Gauguin comes or not, it’s his business, and from the moment we’re ready to receive him, and his bed, his lodging, is there, it means we’re keeping our promise. I insist on this: the plan remains as true and as firm whether Gauguin comes or not, as long as our goal doesn’t change, in the sense of aiming to free us, me and another pal, from this cancer that gnaws at our work, the need to live in ruinous guest-houses. Without any benefit to us. Which is sheer madness. To be carefree, to hope that one of these days I’ll be freed from pennilessness: pure illusion. I’ll count myself well content to work for an allowance that’s just enough and my peace and quiet in my studio for the rest of my life. Well, if I repeat once more that I couldn’t be more indifferent as to whether I settled in Pont-Aven or in Arles — 
   I mean to be inflexible on this point of setting up a permanent studio and to sleep there and not at the guest-house. If you’re kind enough to put us, Gauguin and me, in a position to set ourselves up like that — I only say this, that if we don’t take advantage of this opportunity to free ourselves from lodging-house keepers, we’re throwing into the water all your money and our possibility of withstanding the siege of pennilessness. On that my mind is well and truly made up, and I don’t wish to give in on that point. Under the present circumstances, even while spending, I don’t have what’s barely essential, and I no longer feel in myself the strength to go on very long like that. If Gauguin can find the same opportunity at Pont-Aven, that’s fine, but I tell you the costs here, for which, once this expenditure has been made, plenty of hard work will have been done. The sun down here means a good deal, all the same. As things are, I’m ruining myself and I’m wearing myself out. Now that’s said, I’m not going to Pont-Aven if it means I have to stay at the guest-house there, with those Englishmen and those people from L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts, with whom one debates every evening. A storm in a wash-basin. Handshake Ever yours, Vincent 
   Lastly, vis-à-vis Gauguin, however much we appreciate him, I believe we’ll have to behave like the mother of a family, and calculate the actual expenses. If we listened to him, we’d have hopes of something pretty vague for the future, and we’d stay at the guest-house and we’d live as if in a hell with no way out. I prefer to cloister myself like the monks, free to go to the brothel, just like the monks, or to the wine shop if our heart tells us to. But our work requires a home. All in all, Gauguin leaves me absolutely in the dark about Pont-Aven; by his silence toward my letters he accepts my offer to go to him if need be, but he writes me nothing about ways of finding a studio of our own there, or the price that furniture would cost. 
   And that does seem strange to me. Not that it bothers me, because I know what I want and what I don’t want. And I’m therefore quite resolved not to go to Pont-Aven, unless there too we were to find a house at the low end of prices (15 francs a month is the price of mine), and unless we were to set ourselves up in it so as to be able to sleep there. I’ll write to our sister this evening if I find the time. I kiss her affectionately in thought. Handshake. Vincent Have you received the drawings of the gardens4 and the two figure drawings? I believe that the painting of the head of the old peasant6 is as strange in colour as the sower, but the sower’s a failure and the head of a peasant, that’s more like it. Ah well, I’ll send that one on its own as soon as it’s dry, and I’ll put a dedication to you on it. My dear Theo, I’m writing to you in great haste, but to tell you that I’ve just received a line from Gauguin, who says that he hasn’t written because he was doing a great deal of work, but says he’s still ready to come to the south as soon as chance permits. They’re having a fine time, painting, debating, quarrelling with the virtuous Englishmen;1 he says many good things about Bernard’s work, and Bernard says many good things about Gauguin’s work. I’m painting with the gusto of a Marseillais eating bouillabaisse, which won’t surprise you when it’s a question of painting large Sunflowers. I have 3 canvases on the go, 1) 3 large flowers in a green vase, light background (no. 15 canvas), 2) 3 flowers, one flower that’s gone to seed and lost its petals and a bud on a royal blue background (no. 25 canvas), 3) twelve flowers and buds in a yellow vase (no. 30 canvas). So the last one is light on light, and will be the best, I hope. I’ll probably not stop there. In the hope of living in a studio of our own with Gauguin, I’d like to do a decoration for the studio. Nothing but large Sunflowers. Next door to your shop, in the restaurant, as you know, there’s such a beautiful decoration of flowers there; I still remember the big sunflower in the window. Well, if I carry out this plan there’ll be a dozen or so panels. The whole thing will therefore be a symphony in blue and yellow. I work on it all these mornings, from sunrise. Because the flowers wilt quickly and it’s a matter of doing the whole thing in one go. 
   You did well to tell Tasset that he must give us some tubes of paint for the 15 francs’ carriage on the two unstamped consignments. When I’ve finished these sunflowers I’ll perhaps be short of yellow and blue, so I’ll make a small order to that effect. Tasset ordinary canvas, which at 50 centimes was dearer than Bourgeois’s, is very much to my liking and is very well prepared. I’m very glad that Gauguin is well. I’m beginning to like the south more and more. I have another study on the go, of dusty thistles with an innumerable swarm of white and yellow butterflies. I’ve again missed some models that I hoped to have these past few days. Koning has written that he’s going to stay in The Hague; he intends to send you some studies. I have a whole heap of ideas for new canvases. Today I saw that same coal-boat again, with workers unloading it, that I’ve already told you about; in the same place as the sand-boats, of which I’ve sent you a drawing. It would be a grand subject. Only I’m beginning more and more to look for a simple technique that perhaps isn’t Impressionist. I’d like to paint in such a way that if it comes to it, everyone who has eyes could understand it. I’m writing in haste but wanted to send a line to our sister enclosed herewith. Handshake, I must get back to work. Ever yours, Vincent Gauguin said that Bernard had made an album of croquis of mine, and that he’d shown it to him.  My dear Theo, Would you ask Tasset his opinion on the following question? It seems to me that the more finely a colour is ground, the more it is saturated by oil. Now we’re not over-fond of oil, that goes without saying. If we painted like Monsieur Gérôme and the other trompe-l’oeil photographic ones, we’d no doubt ask for colours ground very fine. We, on the contrary, don’t strongly object to the canvas having a rough look. So if instead of having the colour ground on the stone for God knows how many hours, we grind it just long enough to make it workable, without bothering too much about the fineness of the grain, we’d have colours that were fresher, perhaps darkening less. If he wishes to do a test with the 3 chromes, Veronese, vermilion, orange lead, cobalt, ultramarine, I’m almost certain that at greatly reduced cost I would have colours that were both fresher and longer-lasting. At what price, then? I’m sure that could be done. Probably for the reds, for emerald, which are transparent, too. 
   I add here an order that’s urgent. I’m now on the fourth painting of sunflowers. This fourth one is a bouquet of 14 flowers and is on a yellow background, like a still life of quinces and lemons that I did back then. Only as it’s much bigger, this one creates quite an unusual effect, and I believe that this time it’s painted with more simplicity than the quinces and lemons. Do you remember that one day at the Hôtel Drouot we saw a quite extraordinary Manet, some large pink peonies and their green leaves on a light background? As much in harmony and as much a flower as anything you like, and yet painted in solid, thick impasto and not like Jeannin. That’s what I’d call simplicity of technique. And I must tell you that these days I’m making a great effort to find 
   a way of using the brush without stippling or anything else, nothing but a varied brushstroke. But you’ll see, one day. What a pity painting costs so much. This week I had fewer money worries than other weeks, so I let myself go. I’ll have spent the hundred-franc note in a single week, but at the end of this week I’ll have my four paintings6 and even if I add the price of all the colours that I’ve used up, the week won’t have been wasted. I got up very early every day, I dined and supped well, I was able to work assiduously without feeling myself weaken. But there you are, we live in times when there’s no market for what we do; not only do we not sell, as you see with Gauguin, we’d like to borrow against paintings done and we find nothing, even when the amounts are insignificant and the works substantial. And that’s how we fall prey to all the whims of fortune. And I fear that it will scarcely change during our lifetime. 
   As long as we were preparing the way for richer lives for the painters who will walk in our footsteps, that would already be something. Life is short, though, and especially the number of years when one feels strong enough to brave everything. And in the end, there’s the fear that as soon as the new painting is appreciated, the painters will weaken. In any case, here’s what’s positive, we aren’t the ones who represent decadence today. Gauguin and Bernard are now talking about doing ‘children’s painting’. I prefer that to the painting of the decadents. How does it come about that people see something decadent in Impressionism? It’s actually quite the reverse. I enclose a line for Tasset. The difference in price should be quite considerable, and it goes without saying that I hope to use fewer and fewer finely ground colours. I shake your hand firmly. (One of the decorations of sunflowers on a royal blue background has a ‘halo’, that’s to say, each object is surrounded by a line of the colour complementary to the background against which it stands out). More soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. Certainly, it isn’t impossible that our sister will come later and live with us. It’s a good sign as far as her taste goes that she likes sculpture; that really did please me. Painting as it is now promises to become more subtle — more music and less sculpture — in fact, it promises colour. As long as it keeps this promise. The sunflowers are progressing; there’s a new bouquet of 14 flowers on a green-yellow background, so it’s exactly the same effect — but in larger format, no. 30 canvas1 — as a still life of quinces and lemons that you already have, but in the sunflowers the painting is much simpler. Do you remember that one day at the Hôtel Drouot we saw a bouquet of peonies by Manet? Pink flowers, very green leaves, painted in thick impasto and not glazed, like Jeannin’s. Standing out against a simple white background, I believe.
   Now there’s something that was really healthy. As for stippling, making halos4 or other things, I find that a real discovery, but it can already be foreseen that this technique won’t become a universal dogma any more than another. Another reason why Seurat’s La Grande Jatte, Signac’s landscapes with coarse stippling, Anquetin’s boat, will in time become even more personal, even more original. As far as my clothes are concerned, they were certainly starting to suffer — but only last week I bought a black velvet jacket of quite good quality for 20 francs, and a new hat, so that’s not at all urgent.  But I consulted this postman whom I painted, who has very often set up his little household and dismantled it again, moving house for roughly the price of the indispensable pieces of furniture, and he says that here you can’t get a good bed that will last, for less than 150 francs, if you want to have something solid, of course. 
   However, that hardly upsets the calculation that by saving the money for lodgings, at the end of a year you find you own furniture without having spent any more during the year. And as soon as I’m able, I won’t hesitate to do that. If we were to refrain from setting ourselves up like that, Gauguin and I could drag on from year to year in small lodgings where one can’t fail to become dull-witted. I’m more or less that way already, because it goes back a long, long way. And at present that has even ceased to be a source of pain, and perhaps at first I won’t feel at home in my own home. Never mind. However, let’s not forget Bouvard et Pécuchet, let’s not forget À vau l’eau, because all of that is very, very profoundly true. Au bonheur des dames11 and Bel-ami, that’s no less true, however. It’s ways of seeing things — now, with the first one, we’re less in danger of behaving like Don Quixote; it’s possible, and with the last idea we go the whole hog.
   Now I have the old peasant again this week. Ah — Macknight has cleared off at last15 — I don’t regret it in the least. His pal the Belgian didn’t seem greatly saddened by it either when he came yesterday to tell me about it, and we spent the evening together. He’s very reasonable in his ideas, and knows what he wants, at least. At the moment he’s doing timid Impressionism, but very much by the rules, very exact. And I told him that it was the best thing he could do, although he would lose 2 years on it perhaps, delaying his originality, but after all, I told him, it’s as necessary now to pass through Impressionism properly as it once was to go through a Paris studio. He accepted that absolutely in its entirety, precisely because that way you shock nobody, and you can’t later be accused of not being abreast of things. He’s thinking seriously of going to paint the coal-miners in the Borinage, and if he’s still here when Gauguin comes, not impossible then that we’ll ask him to do for us in the north what we’d do for him in the south — do our utmost to enable him to live more cheaply than on his own. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, On 1 September I’ll have my rent to pay, and if you could send me the money for the week the same day as you receive yours for the month, first of all I would pay the rent the same day, then the outlay would cover both weeks for me. Lastly, if there was some way that you could send me the money on Sunday in your letter or by money order, it wouldn’t leave me indifferent to gain a day that way. I have two models this week, an Arlésienne and the old peasant, whom I’m doing this time against a bright orange background, which, although it doesn’t pretend to represent a red sunset in trompe l’oeil, is perhaps a suggestion of it, all the same. Unfortunately, I fear that the little Arlésienne will stand me up for the rest of the painting. The last time she came she had innocently asked for the money in advance that I’d promised her for all the sittings, and as I made no difficulty about that she scarpered without my seeing her again. 
   Anyway, one of these days she owes it to me to come back, and it would be a bit rich if she didn’t turn up at all. I have a bouquet on the go as well, and also a still life of a pair of old shoes. I have a mass of ideas for my work, and by continuing the figure very assiduously, I’d possibly find something new. But what can you do, sometimes I feel too weak in the face of the given circumstances, and I’d have to be wiser and richer and younger to win the fight. Fortunately for me, I no longer count at all on any victory, and in painting I look for nothing more than the means of getting by in life. I’ve still had no reply whatsoever from Russell. He probably doesn’t have a sou at the moment.
   I really hope that our sister will also have seen the Luxembourg by now. We’ve had two or three glorious days here, very hot, with no wind. The grapes are beginning to ripen, but you hear people saying they won’t be good. I must do some more work today. Because of the models, I’m dreading these last days of the week a little. I’m still negotiating with some other people about posing; there’s something that’s urging me always to do as many figure studies as possible. Circumstances could get even worse in future, and well, whatever the case may be, once I’ve mastered the figure, work will seem more serious to me. Handshake to you and to our sister. Ever yours, Vincent Vexations with models continue all the same, and what with the tenacity of the mistral down here, that doesn’t cheer me up. My dear Theo, A line in haste to thank you very, very much indeed for the prompt dispatch of your letter. In fact, my chap had already come first thing this morning for his rent. Of course, I had to make my decision known today whether or not I’d keep the house on (because I rented it until Michaelmas, and you have to renew or withdraw beforehand). I told my chap that I’d take it on again for 3 months only, or preferably by the month. That way, supposing that our friend Gauguin arrived, we wouldn’t have a very long lease ahead of us should he not like it. Far too often I become thoroughly discouraged, thinking about what Gauguin will say about this part of the country in the long run. Isolation here is quite considerable, and while paying, you have to hack each step out of the ice in order just to get from one day’s work to the same the next day. The difficulty about models is there, but patience, and especially always having a few sous, can help there, of course. 
   But this difficulty is real. I feel that even at the present time I could be an entirely different painter if I was able to settle the question of models. But I also feel the possibility of getting dull-witted and of seeing the time of potency in artistic production disappearing, just as in the course of life our balls start to let us down. That’s inevitable, and of course, here as there it’s self-confidence and striking while the iron’s hot that’s pressing. And so I very often feel despondent. But Gauguin and so many others are in exactly the same position, and we must above all look for the remedy within ourselves, in good will and patience. By being content to be no more than mediocrities. Acting like that, perhaps we’ll open up a new path. 
   I’m very curious to receive your next letter, reporting more fully on your visit to Bing. It doesn’t surprise me that you say that after our sister’s departure you’ll feel an empty gap. You must above all try to fill it. And what could there be against Gauguin’s coming to live with you? That way he could satisfy himself on the subject of Paris while working at the same time. But in that case it would only be fair that he should also reimburse you in paintings for what you would do for him. For me, it’s a constant sorrow to do so comparatively little with the money I spend. My life is restless and anxious, but then, moving house and moving around a lot, perhaps I would only make things worse. It makes enormous trouble for me that I don’t speak the Provençal patois.  I’m still thinking very seriously about using coarser colours, which would be no less solid for being less finely ground.
   At present I often stop myself when planning a painting, because of the paint it costs us. Now, that’s rather a pity, all the same, for this good reason, that perhaps we have the power to work today, but we don’t know if it’ll still be there tomorrow. All the same, rather than losing physical strength, I’m regaining it, and my stomach, especially, is stronger. I’m sending you 3 volumes of Balzac today;7 it’s really a bit old, etc., but the work of Daumier and De Lemud is no uglier for belonging to a period that doesn’t exist any more. At the moment, I’m at last reading Daudet’s L’immortel, which I find very beautiful but hardly consoling. I believe that I’ll have to read a book about elephant hunting, or a totally mendacious book of categorically impossible adventures, by Gustave Aimard9 for example, in order to get over the heartbreak that L’immortel will leave in me. Particularly because it’s so beautiful and so true, in making one feel the emptiness of the civilized world. I must say that for real power I prefer his Tartarin10 though. Warm regards to our sister, and once again, thank you for your letter. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Yesterday I spent another day with that Belgian— who also has a sister among the Vingtistes1 — — the weather wasn’t good but it was a jolly good day for chatting; we went for a walk, and all the same we did see some very fine things at the bullfights and outside the town. We talked more seriously about the plan that if I keep on lodgings in the south, he should definitely set up a kind of post in the coal-fields. That then Gauguin and he and I, in cases where the importance of a painting would be a reason for travelling, could exchange places — sometimes being in the north, but in a familiar part of the country where we have a friend, sometimes in the south. You’ll see him soon, this young man with the Dante-like face, because he’s coming to Paris, and if the room’s available you’ll be doing him a favour by putting him up. He’s quite distinguished in appearance, and he’ll become so in his paintings, I believe. He likes Delacroix, and we talked a lot about Delacroix yesterday; actually he knew the violent sketch of Christ’s boat.  Ah well, thanks to him — at last I have a first sketch of that painting I’ve been dreaming about for a long time — the poet. He posed for it for me. His fine head, with its green gaze, stands out in my portrait against a starry, deep ultramarine sky; his clothing is a little yellow jacket, a collar of unbleached linen, a multicoloured tie. He gave me two sittings in one day. Yesterday I received a letter from our sister, who has seen many things. Ah, if she could marry an artist, that wouldn’t be bad. Well, we’ll have to go on urging her to untangle her personality, rather than her artistic abilities. I’ve finished Daudet’s L’immortel — I rather like the remark by the sculptor Védrine, who says that achieving fame is something like when smoking, sticking your cigar in your mouth by the lighted end. Now I definitely like L’immortel less, much less, than Tartarin.
   You know, it seems to me that L’immortel isn’t as fine as Tartarin for colour, because, with its quantity of subtle and accurate observations, it makes me think of Jean Béraud’s disheartening paintings, so dry, so cold. Tartarin, now, is so genuinely great — with the greatness of a masterpiece, just like Candide. I would very much like to ask you to expose my studies from down here, which aren’t completely dry yet, to the air as far as possible. If they stayed shut away or in the dark, the colours would deteriorate. So, the portrait of the young girl, the harvest (wide landscape with the ruin in the background and the chain of the Alpilles), the small seascape, the garden with the weeping tree and the conifer bushes, if you could put them on stretching frames that would be good. I’m a little attached to those. You can see clearly from the drawing of the small seascape15 that that one’s the most worked up. I’m having 2 oak frames made, for my new head of a peasant and for my study of a poet. Ah, my dear brother, sometimes I know so clearly what I want. In life and in painting too, I can easily do without the dear Lord, but I 
   can’t, suffering as I do, do without something greater than myself, which is my life, the power to create. And if frustrated in this power physically, we try to create thoughts instead of children; in that way, we’re part of humanity all the same. And in a painting I’d like to say something consoling, like a piece of music. I’d like to paint men or women with that je ne sais quoi of the eternal, of which the halo used to be the symbol, and which we try to achieve through the radiance itself, through the vibrancy of our colorations. The portrait conceived in this way doesn’t become an Ary Scheffer, because there’s a blue sky behind it, as in the Saint Augustine. Because Ary Scheffer is so little of a colourist. But this would be more in tune with what Eugène Delacroix was looking for and found in his Tasso in prison18 and so many other paintings depicting a true man. Ah, the portrait — the portrait with the model’s thoughts, his soul — it so much seems to me that it must come. 
   We talked a lot yesterday, the Belgian and I, about the advantages and disadvantages of this place. We quite agree on both. And on the immense interest that would hold for us, to be able to move about, sometimes the north, sometimes the south. He’s going to stay with Macknight again for reasons of living more cheaply. That, though, has a disadvantage for him, I believe, because living with an idler makes you idle. I believe you’ll enjoy meeting him, he’s still young. I believe that he’ll ask your advice on buying Japanese prints and Daumier lithographs. For those, the Daumiers, it would be good to buy more, because later on we won’t be able to find them. The Belgian was saying that with Macknight he paid 80 francs for board and lodging. What a difference, then, living together — myself I have to pay 45 a month for my lodging alone. And so I always come back to the same calculation, that with Gauguin I’ll spend no more than on my own, and that without suffering thereby. 
   Now for them, it’s to be taken into account that they were very badly housed, not in terms of their beds, but of the possibility of working at home. So I’m still between two currents of ideas, the first, material difficulties, turning this way and that to build up an existence, and then the study of colour. I still have hopes of finding something there. To express the love of two lovers through a marriage of two complementary colours, their mixture and their contrasts, the mysterious vibrations of adjacent tones. To express the thought of a forehead through the radiance of a light tone on a dark background. To express hope through some star. The ardour of a living being through the rays of a setting sun. That’s certainly not trompe-l’oeil realism, but isn’t it something that really exists? More soon; I’ll tell you when the Belgian might pass through, because I’ll see him again tomorrow. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent The Belgian said that at home they have a Degroux, the sketch for Saying grace in the Brussels museum. The portrait of the Belgian has something of the portrait of Reid that you have, in terms of execution. My dear Theo I write to you while waiting for Boch, the Belgian, who’s leaving early this morning. He’s already 33 years old, including 10 years of Paris and travels. His sister is even older than he is. Although until now he hasn’t been anything very much as a painter yet, if by returning to his country he can at last shake off his idleness, caused by the enervation in Paris, and by keeping company with idlers, then he’ll find himself on the very threshold of a career as a true painter. He’s very much of his country, because in his speech and in his manners I recognized very clearly the accent of his country, the timidity of those miners, whom I still think about so often. You’ll probably see his two paintings that he’s bringing; the drawing in them is poor, but the colour is already beginning to be lively. His sister will perhaps make a tour in Holland, and I’ve thought in a vague way that I’d really like it if our own sister and she were to meet. I always have hopes that through us, Wil may be able to marry an artist. Now to bring that about she’d have to be a little bit up to date. If Boch’s sister actually goes to Holland, we’d only have to say to Boch that if she wants to study in Breda, she can stay with our mother and our sister. 
   That’ll put them to some very small expenses at home (they put up enough useless people), but after all, it would be an opportunity to become acquainted. But let’s not press the point. But at the Bochs’ home, it’s a household of painters; the two children being in the profession, with that they’re not penniless. Now I sent you an order for colours exactly a week ago. And a letter for Tasset, asking him if he could supply coarsely ground colours more cheaply. At this very moment I’m almost at the end of my supply of colours — altogether I’ve about a dozen and a half different tubes left. So it’s necessary for me to replace the order in question with another. Which you’ll find attached. If Tasset couldn’t do colours more cheaply, you’d have to send double tubes as usual, but I’d need twice as many tubes of that size. Until I have them I’ll have to draw, because I’ve run out as far as colours are concerned. 
   Neither Gauguin nor Bernard has written to me again. I believe that Gauguin doesn’t give a damn, seeing that it isn’t happening right away, and for my part, seeing that Gauguin has been managing anyway for 6 months, I’m ceasing to believe in the urgent need to come to his assistance. Now let’s be careful about it. If it doesn’t suit him, he could reproach me: ‘why have you made me come to this filthy part of the country?’  And I don’t want any of that. Of course, we can remain friends with Gauguin all the same, but I see all too clearly that his attention is elsewhere. I say to myself, let’s behave as if he wasn’t there, then if he comes, so much the better, if he doesn’t come, too bad. How I’d like to set myself up so that I could have a home of my own! I never stop telling myself that if at the start we’d 
   spent even 500 francs on furnishing, we would already have recouped all of it, and I would have furniture and I would be free of lodging-house keepers by now. I’m not pressing the point, but what we’re doing now isn’t wise. There will always be artists passing through here, wishing to escape the harshness of the north. And I feel myself that I’ll always be among that number. True that it would probably be better to go a bit further down, where you’d be more sheltered. True that it won’t be entirely easy to find, but all the more reason; if we set ourselves up here, the costs of moving shouldn’t be enormous. From here to Bordighera, for example, or somewhere near Nice. Once we’d settled, we’d stay there for the rest of our lives. Waiting until you’re very rich is a sorry system, and that’s what I don’t like about the De Goncourts, although it’s the truth — they end up paying a hundred thousand francs for their home and their peace of mind. Now we’d have it for less than a thousand, in that we’d have a studio in the south where we could put someone up. 
   But if we have to make a fortune first we’ll be totally neurotic by the time we reach that sort of tranquillity, and that’s worse than our present state, in which we can still stand all sorts of noises. But let’s be wise enough to know that we’re getting dull-witted all the same. It’s better to lodge others than not to be lodged ourselves here, especially lodging with an innkeeper, which even when you pay doesn’t provide you with a lodging where you feel at home. As for Gauguin, he’s perhaps letting himself drift with the current without thinking about the future, it’s likely. And perhaps he’s saying that I’ll always be there, and that he has our word. But there’s still time to take it back, and truly I feel very tempted to do so, because failing him, I would of course think about another partnership. Whereas at present we’re held to it. If Gauguin finds enough to live on as it is, have we the right to bother him? I’m avoiding writing to Gauguin for fear of saying too bluntly, look, for many months now we’ve been finding enough to live with lodging-house keepers, but claiming that we can’t join together, while at the same time even wearing ourselves out for the future. 
   If you’d wished, why didn’t you tell me to come to the north? I’d have done it by now. It would have cost a mere hundred-franc note, whereas today, during these months that it’s been dragging on, I’ve already paid that same note to my lodging-house keeper, and you must have done the same with yours, or you’ve gone into debt for 100 francs. Which by now makes at least 100 francs pure waste for absolutely nothing. That’s what rankles with me, and what makes me say that both he and I are behaving like madmen at the moment. Is that true or not? In fact, the truth is even more serious. If he’s not in need of changing his way of life, he’s either much richer than me or he has considerably better luck. Ruining oneself costs more than succeeding, and it’s certainly our fault if we haven’t more peace. Handshake and more soon, because I really hope that you’ll still find time to tell me more about our sister’s stay with you. Ever yours, Vincent Boch will probably be with you in a week or ten days. Including the sunflowers, I still have about fifteen new studies here at the moment. 
   
Colours, ground more coarsely, in large tubes like the large tubes of silver white and zinc. For the decoration.


 
Cobalt

large tubes      
6


 
Ultramarine
 
 
6


 
Veronese green
 
 
6


 
Emerald green
 
 
6


 
Vermilion
 
 
2


 
Chrome 
1 lemon
 
 
6


 
,,
2
 
 
6


 
,,
3
 
 
6


 
Orange lead
 
 
2


 
Yellow ochre
 
 
1


6 
Zinc white
 
 
6


6
Silver white
 
 
6


 
    

 
Small tubes


6 
Prussian blue


6
Geranium lake


6
Carmine


6
Ordinary lake


 My dear Theo, Thank you a thousand times for your kind letter and the 300 francs it contained1 — after some weeks of worries I’ve just had a much better one. And just as worries don’t come singly, nor do joys, either. Because actually, always bowed down under this money problem with lodging-house keepers, I put up with it cheerfully. I’d given a piece of my mind to  the said lodging-house keeper, who isn’t a bad man after all, and I’d told him that to get my own back on him for having paid him so much money for nothing, I’d paint his whole filthy old place as a way of getting my money back. Well, to the great delight of the lodging-house keeper, the postman whom I’ve already painted, the prowling night-visitors and myself, for 3 nights I stayed up to paint, going to bed during the day. It often seems to me that the night is much more alive and richly coloured than the day. Now as for recovering the money paid to the landlord through my painting, I’m not making a point of it, because the painting is one of the ugliest I’ve done. It’s the equivalent, though different, of the potato eaters.
   I’ve tried to express the terrible human passions with the red and the green. The room is blood-red and dull yellow, a green billiard table in the centre, 4 lemon yellow lamps with an orange and green glow. Everywhere it’s a battle and an antithesis of the most different greens and reds; in the characters of the sleeping ruffians, small in the empty, high6 room, some purple and blue. The blood-red and the yellow-green of the billiard table, for example, contrast with the little bit of delicate Louis XV green of the counter, where there’s a pink bouquet. The white clothes of the owner, watching over things from a corner in this furnace, become lemon yellow, pale luminous green. I’m making a drawing of it in watercolour tones to send you tomorrow, to give you an idea of it. I’ve written to Gauguin and to Bernard this week, but I didn’t talk about anything but paintings, just so as not to quarrel, when there’s probably no reason to. But whether or not Gauguin comes, if I buy furniture, then we have, in 
   a good place or a bad, that’s another question — a pied-à-terre, a home that lifts from the mind this melancholy of being on the street. Which is nothing when you’re a 20-year-old adventurer, but which is bad when you’ve turned 35. I see in L’Intransigeant today the suicide of Mr Bing Lévy. Not possible, is it, that that could be Bing’s manager, Lévy?? I think it must be somebody else. It gives me great pleasure that Pissarro found something in the young girl. Did Pissarro say anything about the sower? Later on, when I’ve taken those experiments further, the sower will still be the first attempt in that genre. The night café is a continuation of the sower, as is the head of the old peasant12 and of the poet, if I manage to do the latter painting. It’s a colour, then, that isn’t locally true from the realist point of view of trompe l’oeil, but a colour suggesting some emotion, an ardent temperament.
   When Paul Mantz saw Delacroix’s violent and exalted sketch, Christ’s boat, at the exhibition that we saw in the Champs-Elysées, he turned away from it and cried out in his article, ‘I did not know that one could be so terrifying with blue and green’. Hokusai makes you cry out the same thing — but in his case with his lines, his drawing, since in your letter you say to yourself: these waves are claws, the boat is caught in them, you can feel it. Ah well, if we made the colour very correct or the drawing very correct, we wouldn’t create those emotions.  Anyway, soon — tomorrow or the day after — I’ll write to you again on this subject and will reply to your letter, sending you croquis of the night café. Tasset’s consignment has arrived; I’ll write to you tomorrow on the subject of this coarse paint. Milliet will come to say hello to you one of these days; he writes me that he’s going to come back. Thank you once again for the money sent. If I was first going to look for another place, isn’t it likely that then there would be new expenses in that, at least equivalent to the costs of moving? And moreover, would I find better right away? I’m very glad indeed to be able to furnish my house, and that can only help me get on. So many thanks and good handshake; till tomorrow. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve just put the croquis of the new painting, the ‘Night café’, in the post — as well as another one that I did some time ago. I’ll perhaps end up making some Japanese prints. Now yesterday I worked at furnishing the house. Just as the postman and his wife3 told me, the two beds, if you want something sturdy, will come to 150 francs each. I found that everything they’d told me about prices was true. As a result I had to change tack, and this is what I did: I bought one bed in walnut and another in deal, which will be mine, and which I’ll paint later. Then I bought linen for one of the beds, and I bought two palliasses. If Gauguin or somebody else were to come, there you are, his bed will be made in a minute. From the start, I wanted to arrange the house not just for myself but in such a way as to be able to put somebody up. Naturally, that ate up most of my money. With what was left, I bought 12 chairs, a mirror, and some small indispensable things.
   Which in short means that next week I’ll be able to go and live there. For putting somebody up, there’ll be the prettiest room upstairs, which I’ll try to make as nice as possible, like a woman’s boudoir, really artistic. Then there’ll be my own bedroom, which I’d like to be exceedingly simple, but the furniture square and broad. The bed, the chairs, table, all in deal. Downstairs, the studio and another room, also a studio, but a kitchen at the same time. One of these days you’ll see a painting of the little house itself, in full sunshine or else with the window lit and the starry sky. Then you’ll be able to believe you own your country house here in Arles. Because I myself am enthusiastic about the idea of arranging it in such a way that you’ll like it, and that it’ll be a studio in a style absolutely meant to be that way.
   Let’s say that in a year you come to spend a holiday here and in Marseille, it will be ready then — and the way I envisage it, the house will be just full of paintings from top to bottom.  The room where you’ll stay then, or which will be Gauguin’s if Gauguin comes, will have a decoration of large yellow sunflowers on its white walls. Opening the window in the morning, you see the greenery in the gardens and the rising sun and the entrance of the town. But you’ll see these big paintings of bouquets of 12, 14 sunflowers10 stuffed into this tiny little boudoir with a pretty bed and everything else elegant. It won’t be commonplace. And the studio — the red floor-tiles, the white walls and ceiling, the rustic chairs, the deal table, with, I hope, decoration of portraits. That will have character à la Daumier — and it won’t, I dare predict, be commonplace.
   Now I’m going to ask you to look for some Daumier lithographs for the studio, and some Japanese prints, but it’s not at all urgent, and only when you find duplicates of them. And some Delacroixs too, ordinary lithographs by modern artists. It’s not the least little bit urgent, but I have my idea. I really want to make of it — an artist’s house11 but not precious, on the contrary, nothing precious, but everything from the chair to the painting having character. So for the beds I bought local beds, two wide double beds, instead of iron beds. It gives a look of solidity, durability, calm, and if it takes a bit more bed-linen, that’s too bad, but it must have character. Most fortunately I have a charwoman who’s very loyal; without that I wouldn’t dare begin the business of living in my own place. She’s quite old and has a mixed bunch of kids, and she keeps my tiles nice and red and clean.
   I wouldn’t be able to explain to you how pleased I am to find a big, serious job this way. Because I hope it’ll be a true decoration that I’m going to undertake there. So, as I’ve already told you, I’m going to paint my own bed, there’ll be 3 subjects. Perhaps a naked woman, I haven’t decided, perhaps a cradle with a child; I don’t know, but I’ll take my time. I now no longer feel any hesitation about staying here, because ideas for work are coming to me in abundance. I now plan to buy some article for the house every month. And with patience, the house will be worth something for the furniture and the decorations. I must warn you that very shortly I’ll need a big order for colours for the autumn, which I believe is going to be absolutely marvellous. And on reflection, I’ll send you the order enclosed herewith.
   In my painting of the night café I’ve tried to express the idea that the café is a place where you can ruin yourself, go mad, commit crimes. Anyway, I tried with contrasts of delicate pink and blood-red and wine-red. Soft Louis XV and Veronese green contrasting with yellow greens and hard blue greens.  All of that in an ambience of a hellish furnace, in pale sulphur.  To express something of the power of the dark corners of a grog-shop. And yet with the appearance of Japanese gaiety and Tartarin’s good nature. But what would Mr Tersteeg say about this painting? He who, looking at a Sisley — Sisley, the most tactful and sensitive of the Impressionists — had already said: ‘I can’t stop myself thinking that the artist who painted that was a little tipsy’. Looking at my painting, then, he’d say that it’s a full-blown case of delirium tremens.  I find absolutely nothing to object to what you speak of, to exhibit sometime at the Revue Indépendante, as long as I’m not a cause of obstruction for the others who usually exhibit there.
   Only we’d then have to tell them that I’d like to reserve a second exhibition for myself, after this first one of what are in fact studies. Then next year I’d give them the decoration of the house to exhibit, when there would be an ensemble. Not that I insist, but it’s so that the studies shouldn’t be confused with compositions, and to say beforehand that the first exhibition would be one of studies. Because there’s still hardly more than the sower18 and the night café that are attempts at composed paintings. As I write, the little peasant who looks like a caricature of our father is just coming into the café. The resemblance is amazing, all the same. The receding profile and the weariness and the ill-defined mouth, especially. It continues to seem a pity to me that I haven’t been able to do him. I’m adding to this letter the order for colours, which isn’t exactly urgent. 
   Only I’m so full of plans, and then the autumn promises so many superb subjects that I simply don’t know if I’m going to start 5 or 10 canvases. It’ll be the same thing as in the spring, with the orchards in blossom, the subjects will be innumerable. If you gave père Tanguy the coarser paint, he’d probably do that well. His other fine colours are really inferior, especially for the blues. I hope, when preparing the next consignment, to gain a little in quality. I’m doing comparatively less, and coming back to it longer. I’ve kept back 50 francs for the week; thus there has already been 250 for the furniture. And I’ll recoup them anyway, doing it this way. And from today you can say to yourself that you have a sort of country house, unfortunately a bit far away. But it would cease to be very, very far if we had a permanent exhibition in Marseille. We’ll see that in a year, perhaps. Handshake and Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Enclosed herewith letter from Gauguin, which arrived at the same time as a letter from Bernard. At last, it’s the cry of distress my debt is increasing from day to day. I won’t dwell on what he has to do. You offer him hospitality here, and you accept the only means of payment he has, his paintings. But if in addition to and apart from that, he demanded that you pay for his journey, he’s going a bit far, and at least he should very openly offer you some of his paintings, and appeal to you as well as to me in terms less vague than ‘my debt increasing from day to day, my journey is becoming more and more unlikely’. He would have a better sense of things if he said, I prefer to leave all my paintings in your hands, because you’re kind to me, and to run up debts with you, who are fond of me, rather than living with my landlord.
   But he has a stomach-ache, and when you have a stomach-ache, you don’t have free will. Now I don’t have a stomach-ache, at present. And as a result I feel my head freer, and I should hope more lucid. I find it absolutely unfair that you, who’ve just sent the money that you yourself have had to borrow for furnishing the house, should also have to bear the expense of the journey, and especially when this journey is complicated by the payment of the debt. Unless Gauguin, sharing absolutely everything, were to give you the whole of his work. In such a way that, ceasing to keep count, we’d share absolutely everything. If we shared expenses and made common cause, I myself believe that everyone would profit from it after some years’ working in common. 
   Because, if the association is created under these conditions, you will feel, I don’t say happier, but more of an artist and more productive than with me alone. For him, as for me, we’ll feel very clearly that we must succeed, because the honour of all three of us is involved there, and because we’re not working just for ourselves. That seems to me to be the case. And I say to myself that even if we must tumble into the inevitability of things, we should still do it that way. But increasingly I’m dismissing the idea of that tumble when I think of the serenity that we see on faces in Frans Halses and Rembrandts, as in the portrait of old Six, as in his own, as in those Frans Halses that we know so well in Haarlem, of old men and old women.
   It’s better to have serenity than to be too fearful. Why, then, make such a noise on the subject of this affair with Gauguin? If he comes with the two of us he’ll do well, and we really want him to come. But neither he nor we should be crushed. Anyway, there’s a beautiful calm in his letter all the same. Although he leaves his intentions towards us unexplained. But if we wish to do this thing well, it will require loyalty on his part. I’m quite curious to know what he’ll write to you himself; I’ll reply to him exactly as I feel, but I don’t want to say melancholy or sad or mean things to so great an artist. But from the point of view of money, the affair is taking on serious proportions; there’s the journey, there’s the debt, and there’s the fact that the furnishing isn’t complete.
   Only it’s already complete enough that if Gauguin were to drop in here unexpectedly there would be a way to manage while waiting to get our breath back. Gauguin is married, and it’s very important to be aware beforehand that in the long run it’s not certain that different interests will be compatible. Now that’s why, in the case of some sort of association, we have to have the conditions settled well and clearly, precisely so that we don’t fall out later. If all goes well for Gauguin, you’ll see at this point that he’ll go back to his wife and children. Certainly I’d wish that for him. Ah well, we must therefore have more confidence in the value of his paintings than his landlord does, but he mustn’t calculate them to be so expensive to you that instead of your having some benefit from the association, you’d have nothing but responsibilities and costs. That must not be, and anyway, will not be. But you must have from him the best of what he has.
   I must warn you that I plan to keep several studies here at the studio, instead of sending them to you. I believe that if I very firmly continue this project of turning the house here into something that’s a little bit truly artistic, later on you’ll have a series of studies that will hold together. Russell replied, by the way — negatively as far as buying a Gauguin is concerned, but he invites me to spend some time with him, which would start and finish with costing the money for the journey. I’m not saying, though, that he won’t buy a Gauguin, because he himself will feel that he’s not being very helpful at present. But after all, by building himself a house, as long as he puts people up there, he’s doing the very thing that’s needed from the moment our landlords kick us out. More soon, and good handshake. My dear Theo, When Gauguin comes to work with me, and when for his part he shows himself a little bit generous as far as his paintings are concerned — Well, then, won’t you then give work to two artists who without you would have nothing to do, and at the same time admitting that I believe you to be completely in the right when you say that as far as money’s concerned, you see no advantage in it. From another point of view you’ll be doing something like Durand-Ruel, who in the past, before other people recognized Claude Monet’s individuality, bought paintings from him. And Durand-Ruel didn’t earn from it either; at one point he had quantities of those paintings without being able to dispose of them. But after all, what he did will always remain well done, and today he can always say to himself that he won his case. If I saw a financial disadvantage, however, I wouldn’t mention it myself. But Gauguin will have to be loyal, but seeing that the arrival of his friend Laval has opened up another resource for him for the time being, I believe he’s hesitating between Laval and us.
   I don’t blame him for it; only if G. doesn’t lose sight of his interest, it’s only right that you don’t lose sight of yours from the point of view of repayment in paintings. We can already see that Gauguin would have ditched us completely by now if Laval had had a sou or two. I’m very curious to know what he’ll say to you in his next letter, which you’ll certainly have before long. There you have it, I’m sure that whether he comes or not, our friendship with him will endure, but that we must show a little firmness on our side. He won’t find anything better, unless it was precisely by taking advantage of what you’ve wished to do for him. Now, that he won’t dare to do. You should just know that if I don’t see him come I won’t be the least bit upset about it and that I won’t work any the less because of it; that if he comes he’ll be very welcome. But I can see so clearly that counting on him 
   would be just what would do us in. He’ll be loyal if it’s to his advantage, now if he doesn’t come he’ll find something else, but he won’t find anything better and he’ll lose nothing by not trying to be clever.  I’ll need another 5 metres of ordinary canvas at 2. francs, but it goes without saying that Tasset, taking the weight of this package into account, should send either a metre more or a metre less, so that the carriage isn’t double. I believe that now it’s a good opportunity for you to ask Gauguin bluntly when he writes to you, are you coming or are you not coming? If you haven’t made up your mind, on neither side will we be bound to do the thing envisaged. If the plan for a more serious association isn’t to come about, no matter, but then each person must regain his freedom of action. My letter to Gauguin has gone off; I asked them for an exchange if they wish; I would so much like to have here Gauguin’s portrait of Bernard and Bernard’s of Gauguin. Included herewith an article that will interest you; you’d be well advised to go to see that. Ideas for work are coming to me in abundance, and that means that even though isolated I don’t have time to think or to feel. I’m going like a painting-locomotive. 
   Now I believe that this is never going to stop. And my idea is that a living studio, you’ll never find one ready-made, but it’s created from one day to the next through work and staying patiently in the same place. I have a study of an old mill, painted in broken tones6 like the Oak on the rock; that study which you said you had framed with the sower. The idea of the sower still continues to haunt me. Exaggerated studies like the sower, like the night café8 now, usually seem to me atrociously ugly and bad, but when I’m moved by something, as here by this little article on Dostoevsky, then they’re the only ones that seem to me to have a more important meaning. I have a third study now, of a landscape with factory, and an enormous sun in a red sky, above red roofs, in which nature seems to be in a rage, on a day of nasty mistral. As far as the house is concerned, the fact that it will be habitable continues to soothe me very much. Will my work be worse because by staying in the same place I’ll see the seasons come and go on the same subjects? Seeing the same orchards again in spring, the same wheatfields in summer, I’ll inevitably see my work regularly before me in advance, and can plan better. And by keeping certain studies here to make an ensemble that will hold together, after a certain time that will make a calmer body of work for you. I feel that as far as that goes, we’re pretty well on the right road. I could only wish that you were nearer here. 
   Considering that I can’t bring the north closer to the south, what’s to be done? So I say to myself that on my own I’m not capable of doing sufficiently important painting to justify your travelling to the south two or three times a year. But — if Gauguin came and if it was fairly well known that we were living here and helping artists to live and work, I still don’t see the impossibility of the south’s becoming for you, as for me, a second native country in some sense. I’m very pleased to have finished my letter to Gauguin without saying that it bewilders me somewhat that he should hesitate between going to stay with Laval or with me. It would be unfair not to leave him total freedom to choose and to do as he can. But I wrote to him that I was sure that even if he didn’t come here because the journey wouldn’t be possible for him, then he wouldn’t be staying much longer at a hotel.
   And that then it was two permanent studios instead of one. I always come back to this, that once settled one works more calmly. And in that position one can always be of more help to others, too, if the opportunity arises. Bernard says that it makes him suffer to see how Gauguin is often prevented from doing what he can, after all, by purely material questions of paint, canvas, &c. But in any case, that won’t continue. Wouldn’t the worst thing that could happen to him be that he’d be forced to leave his paintings with his landlord as security for his debt, and to take refuge either with you or with me, travelling one way? But in that case, if he didn’t wish to lose his paintings, he must confront his landlord quite directly. A case like that, where the merchandise is in any case worth considerably more than the debt, can be heard as a matter of urgency by the president of the district civil court. If the landlord claims the right to keep everything, which he has no right to. My dear Theo, It’s probable that I’ll have news from you tomorrow morning, but this evening I have time to write to you, and the week has been rather eventful. I plan to go to live in the house tomorrow, but having already bought things, and having more to add — and I’m talking only of what’s strictly necessary — you’ll have to send me 100 francs again, instead of 50. If I count 50 francs for myself for last week, and if I therefore deduct them from the 300 francs sent, I only have left, even with another 50 francs extra, the bare price of the two beds. And so you see that, even if I’ve already bought many other things in addition to the beds themselves, with bed linen, that I’ve spent most of the 50 francs for the week on it, and in part I’ve saved on one bed or the other by making one of them a little plainer. I’m convinced that in the end we’re doing well by furnishing the studio. And as for work, I already feel freer and less harrowed by unnecessary worries than before. 
   Only if I take greater care, I hope, over the style and quality of my work, it will go a little more slowly, or rather, I’ll be obliged to keep the paintings with me longer. So that there’ll be things that hold together and complement each other. And also because there’ll be paintings that I really don’t want to send you before they’re as dry as a bone. In this last category is a no. 30 square canvas of a corner of a garden with a weeping tree, grass, round-trimmed cedar bushes, an oleander bush. Therefore the same corner of a garden of which you already have a study in the last consignment. But as it’s larger, there’s a lemon-coloured sky above it all, and then the colours have the richness and intensities of autumn. Then it’s done in much heavier impasto, plain and thick. That’s the first painting this week. The second shows the outside of a 
   café, lit on the terrace outside by a large gas-lamp in the blue night, with a patch of starry blue sky. The third painting this week is a portrait of myself, almost colourless, in ashy tones against a pale Veronese background. I purposely bought a good enough mirror to work from myself, for want of a model, because if I can manage to paint the coloration of my own head, which is not without presenting some difficulty, I’ll surely be able to paint the heads of the other fellows and women as well. The question of painting night scenes or effects, on the spot and actually at night, interests me enormously. This week I’ve done absolutely nothing but paint and sleep and take my meals. That means sessions of twelve hours, 6 hours, depending, and then 12-hour periods of sleep, also at a single stretch. 
   I read in the literary supplement of Saturday’s Figaro (15 Sept.) the description of an Impressionist house. This house was built, as would be the bottoms of bottles, of bricks of rounded glass — purple glass. With the sun glancing off it, the yellow glints flashing from it, it produced an extraordinary effect. To support these walls of glass bricks in the shape of purple eggs, they had devised a support in black and gilded iron, representing strange shoots of vines and other climbing plants. This purple house was right in the middle of a garden, all of whose paths were made of a very yellow sand. The beds of ornamental flowers were naturally most extraordinary in their coloration. This house, if I remember well, must be in Auteuil. Without changing anything at the house, either now or later, I’d nevertheless like to make it, through the decoration, an artist’s house. That will come. I shake your hand firmly. I took a magnificent walk by myself in the vineyards today. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Many thanks for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. I’ve also received Maurin’s drawing, which is superb. That man’s a great artist. Last night I slept in the house, and although there are still things to be done, I feel very happy there. Besides, I feel that I can make something of it that will last, and from which someone else will also be able to benefit. Now money spent will no longer be money wasted, and I believe it won’t be long before you see the difference there. At present it makes me think of Bosboom’s interiors, with the red tiles, the white walls, the furniture in deal or walnut, the patches of intense blue sky and greenery visible through the windows. Now the surroundings, with the public garden, the night cafés, the grocer’s shop, aren’t Millet, of course, but failing that, it’s pure Daumier, pure Zola. Now that’s quite enough to find ideas in, isn’t it? I already wrote to you yesterday that, if I count the two beds at 300 francs, the price can’t be reduced any further. If, however, I’ve already bought more than that, it’s because, if I already put half of last week’s money into it, yesterday I 
   had to pay another 10 francs to the lodging-house keeper and 30 francs for a palliasse. At the moment I have 5 francs left in my pocket. So I’m going to ask you to send me another louis, depending on what you can manage — but by return of post — to see me through the week, or 50 francs, if it’s possible. One way or another, this month I’d like to be able to count on receiving 100 instead of 50, again, over the whole month, as I asked you in my letter yesterday. If I save 50 francs over the month myself, if I add to that the other 50, it means that in total I’ll have spent 400 francs on furniture. My dear Theo, here we are, at last, more on the right road! It’s true that it doesn’t matter not having hearth nor home as long as you’re young, and living like a traveller, in cafés, but that was becoming intolerable to me now, and most of all, it wasn’t compatible with thoughtful work. So my plan is all worked out. I’ll try to do painting for what you send me every month, and then I want to do painting for the house. What I do for the house will be to reimburse you for previous expenditure. I’m still something of a tradesman, in fact, in the sense that I’m anxious to prove that I pay my debts, and know what I want for the merchandise that the lousy trade of a poor painter forces me to labour at.
   Ah well, I feel more or less sure of succeeding in making a decoration that will be worth 10 thousand francs in time. Let me say — If here we set up a studio-refuge for one or other of our pals who are broke, no one will ever be able to reproach us, neither you nor me, with living and spending for ourselves alone.  Now to set up such a studio you need a working capital; now it’s I who have eaten it up in the course of my unproductive years, and I’ll pay it back now that I’m beginning to produce. I assure you that, for you as well as for me, I judge it to be indispensable, but what’s more our right, always to have a louis or a few louis in our pocket, and a certain stock of merchandise to handle. But my idea would be that in the end we’d have set up and would leave to posterity a studio in which a successor could live. I don’t know if I’m expressing myself clearly enough, but in other words: we’re working at an art, at matters that won’t be of our times only but which may also be continued by others after us. You’re doing that in your business; it’s undeniable that it will increase in future, even though you have many vexations at present. But for me, I foresee that other artists will wish to see colour under a stronger sun and in a more Japanese clarity. 
   Now if I set up a studio-refuge right at the entrance to the south, that’s not so silly. And precisely that means that we can work calmly. Ah, if others say, it’s too far from Paris &c.? Let them, too bad for them. Why did the greatest colourist of all, Eugène Delacroix, judge it indispensable to go to the south, and as far as Africa? Obviously because not only in Africa but even from Arles onwards you’ll naturally find fine contrasts between reds and greens, blues and oranges, sulphur and lilac. And all true colourists will have to come to admit that there exists another coloration than that of the north. And I don’t doubt that if Gauguin came, he would love this part of the country; if Gauguin didn’t come, it’s because he has already had this experience of more colourful countries, and he’d still be one of our friends and in agreement in principle. And another one of them would come in his place. If what we’re doing looks out toward the infinite, if we see our work having its raison d’être and continuing on beyond, we work with more serenity. Now you have that twice over.
   You’re kind to painters, and be sure that the more I think about it the more I feel that there’s nothing more genuinely artistic than to love people. You’ll say to me that then we’d do well to do without art and artists. That’s true on the face of it, but after all, the Greeks and the French and the old Dutchmen accepted art, and we see art always recover after inevitable periods of decline — and I don’t believe that we’d be more virtuous for this reason, that we had a horror of artists and their art. At present I don’t yet find my paintings good enough for the benefits I’ve had from you. But once they’re good enough, I assure you that you will have created them just as much as I, and the fact is that we make them together. But I won’t labour the point, because it will become as clear as daylight to you if I succeed in doing things a little more seriously.  At the moment I have another no. 30 square canvas 
   on the go, a garden again, or rather a walk under plane trees, with green turf and black clumps of pines. You did very well to order the colours and the canvas, because the weather is superb, superb. The mistral is still there, but there are intervals of calm, and then it’s wonderful. If we had less mistral, this part of the country would really be as beautiful, and would lend itself as much to art, as Japan. As I write, very kind letter from Bernard, who’s thinking of coming to Arles this winter — whim — but then, perhaps it’s also that Gauguin is sending him to me as a substitute, and would himself prefer to stay in the north. We’ll know soon, because I’m sure that he’ll write to you one way or another. Bernard’s letter speaks of Gauguin with great respect and sympathy, and I’m convinced that they have mutually understood one another. And I certainly believe that Gauguin has done Bernard good. 
   Whether Gauguin comes or not, he’ll still be one of our friends, and if he doesn’t come now he’ll come at another time. I instinctively feel that Gauguin is a calculating person, who, seeing himself at the bottom of the social ladder, wishes to regain a position by means that will be honest, to be sure, but which will be very shrewd. Gauguin has little idea that I’m able to take account of all that. And he perhaps doesn’t know that he must at all costs gain time, and that he’ll gain it with us, if he were to gain nothing else thereby. Now if one of these days he does a bunk from Pont-Aven with Laval or Maurin9 without paying his debt, in my opinion he would still be in the right in his case, just like any animal at bay. I don’t believe that it’s wise to offer Bernard 150 francs for one painting a month immediately, as we’ve offered Gauguin. And isn’t Bernard, who has clearly talked at length with Gauguin about the whole business, rather counting on replacing Gauguin?
   I believe that it’ll be necessary to be very firm and very categorical in all of this. And without giving our reasons, to speak very clearly. I can’t blame Gauguin — speculator, stockbroker10 — if he wishes to risk something in business, only I myself wouldn’t be part of it, I’d a thousand times sooner continue with you, whether you’re with the Goupils or not. And the new dealers are, as you know full well, exactly the same as the old ones in my opinion. In principle, in theory, I’m for an association of artists protecting their livelihood and their work, but in principle and in theory I’m equally against attempts to destroy old firms, once established. Just let them rot in peace and die a natural death. It’s pure presumption to try to revive the trade. Have nothing to do with it, protect your livelihoods among yourselves, live as a family, as brothers and companions; splendid; even in a case where that didn’t succeed, I’d like to be part of it, but I’ll never be part of a manoeuvre against other dealers. I shake your hand firmly; I hope that what I’m forced to ask of you won’t cause you too much financial trouble. But I didn’t want to delay going to sleep at my house. And if you’re in financial difficulties yourself, I’ll get through the week with 20 francs more, but that will be urgent. Ever yours, Vincent 
   The letter that Gauguin will send you shortly will, I’m inclined to believe, clear the matter up. I myself don’t blame an artist of his merit for saying, you’ll pay my journey and my debt if you wish me to come, because I don’t have any — any money. But on the other hand, in that case he’d have to be very generous with his paintings. Then — but we’d still have to have the money — I wouldn’t see any harm in the thing. But these paintings, which will be sold one day, will tie up the interest on what they cost, perhaps for many years to come. And in fact, a painting for which we pay 400 francs today and which we sell for 1, francs ten years later is still sold at cost price, because it has sat there doing nothing. But you know this better than I do. I shouldn’t be surprised if little by little you regain a love of business, or at least that you’ll be reconciled with your present position when you’ll feel that those who invent new things in business don’t know how to make a great revolution in it. You’re kind to artists, you are, in fact, right at the heart of the trade, you do what you can, you’re damned right. Only take care of your health if you can, and don’t get upset about nothing. That will come quite of its own accord now, if it must come.  I only want to emphasize this, that it seems to me that Gauguin, by giving you alone his paintings on deposit, and quietly waiting for his moment while working here with me and repaying our advances with his work, would be pursuing a policy that I would respect more than any other position he could take.
 0  For Bernard, if Bernard wished to come here, it wouldn’t be on the same conditions as Gauguin — it would seem to me. If there was a benefit in living together, there’s nothing to prevent you agreeing to buy something from him from time to time, if it’s possible. But no sort of contract with him, he’s too changeable. If Gauguin doesn’t come, he’ll succeed all the same, but he won’t succeed through his contrivance, but through the real merit of his canvases. As long as he keeps the time and the money and the freedom needed to do them, that’s all. I can assure you that I would certainly not be a better dealer than you; in the given circumstances you do perfectly well, and I’d only wish to send you better paintings. I’m trying to do that, and I’ll continue to try to do so. I expect to return to my garden canvas again soon. It’s an immense advantage that I have, not to be short of canvases and colours, and so it’s certainly my duty to work without respite. If Gauguin came, I’m inclined to believe that we’d make our colours at home ourselves; I daren’t do it on my own, because I fear that it would discourage me if it didn’t work straightaway. I’m very curious to know what Tanguy will charge for his tubes. Did you read an article in the number of Le Courrier Français that you sent, ‘la truie bleue’? Very good, and it reminds you precisely of La Segatori. You’ll enjoy reading that article. I’ll see Milliet today, I think. Thank you in advance for the Japanese prints. I’m keeping all Bernard’s letters, they’re sometimes really interesting; you’ll read them some day or other; they already make quite a bundle. This firmness I was speaking of, that it will be necessary to have with Gauguin, it’s solely because we already made our position clear when he described his plan of action in Paris. You replied well then without committing yourself, but also without wounding him in his amour propre. And it’s the same thing that could be necessary again. My dear Theo, I already wrote to you early this morning, then I went to continue working on a painting of a sunny garden. Then I brought it back — and went out again with a blank canvas and that’s done, too. And now I feel like writing to you again. Because I’ve never had such good fortune; nature here is extraordinarily beautiful. Everything and everywhere. The dome of the sky is a wonderful blue, the sun has a pale sulphur radiance, and it’s soft and charming, like the combination of celestial blues and yellows in paintings by Vermeer of Delft. I can’t paint as beautifully as that, but it absorbs me so much that I let myself go without thinking about any rule. That gives me 3 paintings of the gardens facing the house. Then the two cafés. Then the sunflowers. Then Boch’s portrait, and mine. Then the red sun over the factory8 and the men unloading sand. The old mill. Leaving the other studies aside, you can see that some hard work has been done. 
   But my colours, my canvas, my wallet are completely exhausted today. The last painting, done with the last tubes on the last canvas, is a naturally green garden, is painted without green as such, with nothing but Prussian blue and chrome yellow. I’m beginning to feel quite different from what I was when I came here, I have no more doubts, I no longer hesitate to tackle something, and that could increase still further. But what scenery! It’s a public garden where I am, just near the street of the good little ladies, and Mourier, for example, never went there, whereas we used to walk in these gardens almost every day, but on the other side (there are 3 of them). But you’ll understand that it’s precisely that which gives a je ne sais quoi of Boccaccio to the place. That side of the garden is also, for the same reason of chastity or morality, empty of flowering shrubs such as the oleander. It’s ordinary plane trees, pines in tall clumps, a weeping tree and green grass. But it has such intimacy! There are gardens like that by Monet. 
         As long as you can bear the burden of all the colours, canvas, money that I’m forced to spend, keep on sending me them. Because what I’m preparing will be better than the last consignment, and believe that we’ll gain rather than lose by it. If, that is, I manage to do an ensemble that will hold together. Which I’m trying to do. But is it absolutely impossible for Thomas to lend me two or three hundred francs on my studies? That would mean that I would earn over a thousand from them, because I couldn’t tell you enough, I’m thrilled, thrilled, thrilled with what I see. And that gives you yearnings for autumn, a zest that means that time passes without your feeling it. Beware the morning after, beware the winter mistrals. Today, while actually working, I thought a lot about Bernard. His letter is full of veneration for Gauguin’s talent — he says that he finds him so great an artist that it almost frightens him, and he finds everything that he, Bernard, does, bad in comparison with Gauguin. And you know that last winter Bernard was still trying to pick a quarrel with Gauguin. Ah well, whatever the case, and whatever happens, it’s very consoling that those artists are our friends, and I dare to believe will remain so, no matter how things turn out. I have such luck with the house — with work — that I even dare believe that blessings won’t come singly, but that you’ll share them for your part, and have good luck too. Some time ago I read an article on Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio, Giotto, Botticelli; my God, what an impression that made on me, reading those people’s letters!15
   Now Petrarch was just near here, in Avignon, and I see the same cypresses and oleanders. I’ve tried to put something of that into one of the gardens, painted with thick impasto, lemon yellow and lemon green. Giotto touched me the most — always suffering and always full of kindness and ardour as if he were already living in a world other than this. Giotto is extraordinary, anyway, and I feel him more than the poets: Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio. It always seems to me that poetry is more terrible than painting, although painting is dirtier and more damned annoying, in fact. And after all, the painter says nothing; he keeps quiet, and I like that even better. My dear Theo, when you’ve seen the cypresses, the oleanders, the sun down here — and that day will come, don’t worry — you’ll think even more often of beautiful works by Puvis de Chavannes: Pleasant land19 and so many others. Throughout the Tartarin side20 and the Daumier side of this funny part of the world, where the good folk have the accent that you know, there’s already so much that’s Greek, and there’s the Venus of Arles, like the one of Lesbos, and you can still feel that youthfulness, despite everything. I don’t doubt in the very least that one day you too will know the south. You’ll perhaps go to see Claude Monet when he’s in Antibes, or you’ll find some opportunity, anyway. When the mistral’s blowing, though, it’s the very opposite of a pleasant land here, because the mistral’s really aggravating. But what a compensation, what a compensation, when there’s a day with no wind. What intensity of colours, what pure air, what serene vibrancy. 
   Tomorrow I’m going to draw until the colours arrive. But now I’ve reached the point where I’ve made up my mind not to draw a painting in charcoal any more. There’s no point; you have to tackle the drawing with the colour itself in order to draw well. Ah — the exhibition at the Revue Indépendante25 — fine — but once and for all — we’re far too much smokers to put the cigar in our mouth the wrong way round. We’ll be obliged to try to sell, in order to be able to do again, better, the same things sold; that’s because we’re in a lousy trade — but let’s look for something other than the joy of the town, which means grief at home. This afternoon I had a select audience of 4 or 5 pimps and a dozen kids who found it particularly interesting to watch the colours come out of the tubes. Ah, well, that sort of audience — that’s fame, or rather, I have the firm intention of thumbing my nose at ambition and fame, like these kids and these ruffians from the banks of the Rhône and rue du Bout d’Arles.  I was at Milliet’s today; he’s going to come tomorrow, having extended his stay by 4 days. I’d like Bernard to go to do his military service in Africa, because he’d do fine things there, and I still don’t know what to say to him. He said he’d exchange his portrait for one of my studies. But he said that he daren’t do Gauguin, as I’d asked him, because he feels too shy with Gauguin. Bernard is actually so temperamental!! He’s sometimes crazy and mean, but I’m certainly not the one who has the right to blame him for that, because I know the same neurosis too much myself, and I know that he wouldn’t blame me either. If he went to see Milliet in Africa, Milliet would certainly make friends with him. Because Milliet’s very loyal as a friend, and makes love so easily that he almost has contempt for love. 
   What’s Seurat doing? I wouldn’t dare show him the studies I’ve already sent, but the ones of the sunflowers and the bars and the gardens, those I’d like him to see — I often think about his system, and yet I won’t follow it at all, but he’s an original colourist, and it’s the same thing for Signac, but to a different degree; the pointillists have found something new, and I like them very much all the same. But I — I say so frankly — I’m returning more to what I was looking for before coming to Paris, and I don’t know if anyone before me has talked about suggestive colour. But Delacroix and Monticelli, while not talking about it, did it. But I’m again the way I was in Nuenen, when I made a vain attempt to learn music — even then — so strongly did I feel the connections there are between our colour and Wagner’s music. Now it’s true, I see in Impressionism the resurrection of Eugène Delacroix, but the interpretations being both divergent and somewhat irreconcilable, it won’t be Impressionism that will formulate the doctrine. It’s for that reason that I remain among the Impressionists, because that says nothing and commits you to nothing. And being there as a pal, I don’t have to state my position. My God, you have to play the fool in life; I ask for the time to study, and you, do you ask for anything other than that? But I feel that you must, like me, long to have the peace and quiet needed in order to study with an open mind. 
   And I’m so afraid of taking it away from you with my requests for money. However, I do so many calculations, and actually today I found that for the ten metres of canvas I had calculated the colours correctly, except for one, the fundamental one of yellow. If all my colours run out at the same time, isn’t that proof that I can sense the relative proportions like a sleep-walker? It’s the way it is with drawing, I hardly measure, and in that I’m quite categorically opposed to Cormon, who says that if he didn’t measure he would draw like a pig. I think you did quite well, all the same, to buy so many stretching frames, because you have to have a certain number to be able to dry the canvases thoroughly, which preserves them, and I also have a whole lot of them here myself. But you mustn’t hesitate to take them off the stretching frames, so that everything doesn’t take up too much space. Here I pay 1. francs for no. 30, 25, 20 stretching frames, and 1 franc for no. 15, 12, 10. If I have them made by the carpenter. As carpentry is very expensive here, Tanguy could also supply them if he reckoned them at that price. I’m looking for a frame in light walnut, at 5 francs, for the square no. 30 canvas, and I think I’ll get it. A frame in heavy oak for the no. 10 canvas, portrait, also costs me 5 francs. I’ve also had to order 5 no. 30 stretching frames for the new canvas, which are already made and which I have to collect. That will prove to you that I can’t be without some money at this period of work. 
   There’s a consolation in that we’re always among raw materials, and aren’t speculating but only trying to produce. And then we can’t go wrong. I hope it’ll be like that, and if I’m in the inevitable necessity of using up my colours and my canvas and my wallet, you can be sure that that’s not yet the way that we’re to perish. Even if for your part you use up your purse and what’s in it, true, it’s bad, but say to me calmly: there’s nothing left, then there’ll be more, because of what I’ll have done with it. But — you’ll say to me, rightly — in the meantime? In the meantime — I’ll draw, because it’s more convenient to do nothing but draw than to paint. I shake your hand firmly. What days these are, not because of events, but I feel so strongly that we’re not decadents, you and I, and not finished yet, and won’t be, in time to come. But you know that I don’t contradict the critics who will say that my paintings aren’t — finished. I shake your hand, and more soon.  Ever yours, Vincent I’ve read Richepin’s Césarine too — I love what the so-called crazy woman says, all of life is well-constructed equations.  My dear Theo Many thanks for your letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. Milliet came this morning too, bringing me the parcel of Japanese prints and others. Among them I love the café-concert on two sheets, with a line of purple female musicians against the yellow-lit wall;2 I didn’t know that sheet, what’s more there are several others that were unknown to me; there’s one — a head of a woman — that must have a good pedigree. At present I’ve also bought a dressing-table with all the necessaries, and my own little bedroom is furnished. In the other one — Gauguin’s or another lodger’s — we’ll still need a dressing-table and a chest of drawers, and downstairs I’ll need a large stove and a cupboard. None of that’s at all urgent, and as a result I can already see the goal, to have the means of having a roof over my head for a good long time. You wouldn’t believe how much that calms me; I have such a passion to make — an artist’s house4 — but a practical one and not the usual studio full of curios. 
   I’m also thinking of planting two oleanders outside the door, in tubs. Anyway, on this studio we’re probably spending several hundred francs less than Russell, for example, who spends thousands. And actually, even if I had the choice between the two, for my part I’d prefer the few-hundred-francs method, as long as each piece of furniture was four-square and substantial. But still, the room in which I’ll put up those who pass through here will be like a boudoir, and when it’s finished you’ll see that it’s not a haphazard creation, but a job done that way deliberately. Bing’s text on Japan is a bit dry and leaves something to be desired — he says, there’s a great, typical art, but while he gives a few scraps of it; he doesn’t do a very good job of making you feel the character of this art. Have you read Madame Chrysanthème7 yet? The great peace of mind that the house brings me is above all this, that from now on I feel that I’m working by providing for the future; after me another painter will find 
   an enterprise under way. I’ll need time, but my mind is set on making a decoration for the house that will be worth the money I spent in the years during which I didn’t produce. The portrait of our mother gave me great pleasure because you can see that she’s well and that she still has a very lively expression. Only I don’t like it at all as a real likeness; I’ve just painted my own portrait, and I have the same ashy coloration, and unless they do us in colour they’ll give an idea of us that’s not very lifelike. Precisely because I’d gone to terrible trouble to find the combination of ashy tones and grey pink, I cannot enjoy the likeness in black. Would Germinie Lacerteux be Germinie Lacerteux without colour? Obviously not. How I’d like to have painted portraits in our family! For the second time I’ve scraped off a study of a Christ with the angel in the Garden of Olives. Because here I see real olive trees. 
   But I can’t, or rather, I don’t wish, to paint it without models. But I have it in my mind with colour — the starry night, the figure of Christ blue, the strongest blues, and the angel broken lemon yellow. And all the purples from a blood-red purple to ash in the landscape. I’ve been to get five no. 30 stretching frames, so I have even more intentions. I’m having the paintings that stay here framed in oak and in walnut. I’ll need time, but you’ll see it later. I hope you’ll give me details of your visit to Maurin. I like the drawing of the two women in the cart enormously. If it took some time before anybody came here with me, it still wouldn’t make me change my mind that it was urgent to take this step, and that in time it will be useful. We feel that the art in which we’re working has a long future yet to come, and so we have to be established like those who are tranquil, and not live like the decadents. Here I’ll have more and more the existence of a Japanese painter, living close to nature like a petit bourgeois. So you can easily tell that it’s less gloomy than the decadents. If I manage to live to quite an old age I’ll be something like père Tanguy. Ah well, as for our personal future, in fact we know nothing about it, but we nevertheless feel that Impressionism will last. More soon, and many, many thanks for all your kindnesses. I think I’ll put the Japanese prints downstairs in the studio. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, The fine weather of these past few days has disappeared and has been replaced by mud and rain. But it will surely return before the winter. Only it’ll be a matter of taking advantage of it because — the fine days — are short — Especially for painting. I plan to do a lot of drawing this winter. If only I could draw figures from memory, I’d always have something to do, but — take a figure by the most skilful of all the artists who sketch from life — Hokusai, Daumier, for me this figure is never what the figure painted from the model by these same masters would be, or other master portraitists. Ah well — if inevitably we’re too often faced with a shortage of models, and especially of intelligent models, we mustn’t despair or grow weary of the struggle for that reason. I’ve arranged all the Japanese prints in the studio, and the Daumiers2 and the Delacroixs and the Géricault. If you come across the Delacroix Pietà, or the Géricault, I urge you to buy as many of them as you can. Another thing that I’d very much like to have in the studio is Millet’s Labours of the fields5 — and Lerat’s etching of his Sower that Durand-Ruel is selling for 1. francs. And lastly the little etching by Jacquemart after Meissonier, The reader. A Meissonier that I’ve always found admirable. I can’t help liking Meissoniers. I’m reading an article on Tolstoy in the Revue des Deux Mondes — it appears that Tolstoy takes an enormous interest in his people’s religion. Like George Eliot in England. There’s said to be a religious book by Tolstoy, I believe it’s called ‘Ma religion’; it must be very beautiful. From what I gather from that article, in it he’s searching for what will remain eternally true in the religion of Christ, and what all religions have in common; 
   it appears that he admits of neither the resurrection of the body nor even that of the soul, but says like the nihilists that after death there’s nothing more, but when a man’s dead, and well and truly dead, living humanity remains for ever. Anyway, not having read the book itself, I couldn’t say exactly how he conceives of the matter, but I believe that his religion cannot be cruel and increase our sufferings, but on the contrary, it must be very consoling and must inspire serenity, and energy, and the courage to live, and a whole lot of things. Among Bing’s reproductions I find the drawing of the blade of grass, and the carnations, and the Hokusai admirable. But whatever one may say, for me the more ordinary Japanese prints, coloured in flat tones, are admirable for the same reason as Rubens and Veronese. I know perfectly well that this isn’t primitive art. But the fact that the primitives are admirable isn’t in the very least a reason for me to say, as is becoming a habit, ‘when I go to the Louvre I can’t go beyond the primitives’. Supposing one were to say to a serious collector of Japanese art — to Lévy13 himself — sir, I cannot help finding these 5-sous Japanese prints admirable — It’s more than likely that that person would be a bit shocked and would pity my ignorance and my bad taste. Exactly as in the past it was in bad taste to like Rubens, Jordaens, Veronese. 
     I believe that eventually I’ll stop feeling lonely in the house, and that on days of bad winter weather, for example, and in the long evenings, I’ll find an occupation that will absorb me completely. A weaver, a basket-maker, often spends entire seasons alone, or almost alone, with his work as his only pastime. But what makes those people stay where they are is precisely the feeling of the house, the reassuring, familiar look of things. Of course I’d like company, but if I don’t have it I won’t be unhappy on that account, and then, above all, the time will come when I’ll have someone. I have little doubt about that. Now in your home too, I believe that if one is willing to put people up one can find plenty among artists, for whom the matter of somewhere to stay is a very serious problem. And for me, I believe that it’s my absolute duty to try to earn money with my work, and so I see my work quite clearly ahead of me. Ah, if only all artists had enough to live on — enough to work on — but that not being so, I wish to produce, and to produce a great deal, and with intense effort and determination. And perhaps the day will come when we can expand our business and be more influential for others. But that’s a long way off, and there’s a great deal of work to be got through first. If we were living in wartime we’d possibly have to fight, we’d regret it, we’d bemoan not living in peacetime, but at all events, the necessity being there — we’d fight.  And in the same way, we surely have the right to wish for a state of affairs in which money wouldn’t be needed in order to live. However, since 
   everything’s done with money now, we must think hard about making some while we spend it. But I have a better chance of earning from painting than from drawing. In short, there are many more people who can skilfully make a croquis than people who can paint freely and who grasp nature from the point of view of colour. That will always be rarer, and whether or not the paintings are slow to be appreciated, they’ll find their collector one day. But I believe that as for the paintings with rather thick impasto, they’ll have to dry longer here. I’ve read that Rubenses in Spain have remained infinitely richer in colour than those in the north. Ruins, even exposed to the open air, remain white here, whereas in the north they turn grey, dirty, black, &c. You can be sure that if the Monticellis had dried in Paris they’d now be very much duller. I’m beginning now to see better the beauty of the women here, and so always, always I think again of Monticelli. Colour plays an immense part in the beauty of the women here — I’m not saying that their forms aren’t beautiful, but that’s not where the local charm lies. It’s the broad lines of the colourful costume, worn well, and it’s the tone of the flesh more than the form. But I’ll have trouble before I’ll be able to do them in the way I’m beginning to feel it. But what I’m certain of is making progress while staying here. And a certain skilfulness isn’t enough to make a painting that would be truly of the south. It’s looking at things for a long time that matures you and makes you understand more deeply. 
   I hadn’t thought when leaving Paris that I would have found Monticelli and Delacroix so true. It’s only now, after months and more months, that I’m beginning to realize that they didn’t imagine anything. And I think that next year you’ll see the same subjects again: orchards, the harvest, but — with a different colour and above all, altered execution. And that will still continue, these changes and these variations. Even while working, I feel that I needn’t rush. After all, what would it do to put into practice the old saying that one should study for ten years or so, and then produce a few figure paintings? That’s what Monticelli did, though. Think of several hundred of his paintings as no more than studies. Then, however, figures the way the yellow woman16 was, the way the woman with the parasol is, the small one that you have, the lovers that Reid had, those are complete figures, in which as far as the drawing goes there’s absolutely nothing to do but to admire it. Because there Monticelli achieves a way of drawing that’s as rich and superb as Daumier and Delacroix. Certainly, at the prices Monticellis are at, it would be an excellent speculation to buy some. The day will come when his fine drawn figures will be valued as very great art. 
   I believe that the town of Arles was once infinitely more glorious for the beauty of its women, for the beauty of its traditional dress. Now it all looks sickly and faded as far as character goes. But if you look at it for a long time, the old charm reveals itself. And that’s why I understand that I’m losing absolutely nothing by staying where I am, and contenting myself with watching things go by, the way a spider in its web waits for flies. I can’t force anything, and as I’m settled now I can take advantage of all the fine days, all the opportunities to catch a real painting from time to time. Milliet’s lucky, he has all the Arlésiennes he wants, but there you are, he can’t paint them, and if he was a painter he wouldn’t have any. I must bide my time now, without rushing anything. I’ve read an article on Wagner — L’amour dans la musique, by the same author who wrote the book on Wagner, I believe. What a need we have of the same thing in painting! It seems that in the book Ma religion, Tolstoy suggests that whatever may occur in the way of a violent revolution, there will also be a private, secret revolution in people, from which a new religion, or rather, something altogether new, will be reborn, which will have no name but which will have the same effect of consoling, of making life possible, that the Christian religion once had.
   It seems to me that that book must be very interesting. We’ll eventually have enough of cynicism, scepticism, mockery, and we’ll want to live — more musically. How will that come about, and what will we find? It would be curious to be able to predict it, but it’s even better to have a feeling of what it will be, instead of seeing in the future absolutely nothing but disasters, which will nevertheless be sure to fall into the modern world and civilization like so many terrible thunderbolts, through a revolution or a war or the bankruptcy of moth-eaten governments. If we study Japanese art, then we see a man, undoubtedly wise and a philosopher and intelligent, who spends his time — on what? — studying the distance from the earth to the moon? — no; studying Bismarck’s politics? — no, he studies a single blade of grass. But this blade of grass leads him to draw all the plants — then the seasons, the broad features of landscapes, finally animals, and then the human figure. He spends his life like that, and life is too short to do everything. Just think of that; isn’t it almost a new religion that these Japanese teach us, who are so simple and live in nature as if they themselves were flowers? And we wouldn’t be able to study Japanese art, it seems to me, without becoming much happier and more cheerful, and it makes us return to nature, despite our education and our work in a world of convention.
   Isn’t it saddening that up to now Monticellis have never been reproduced in fine lithographs or vibrant etchings? I’d like to see what artists would say if an engraver like the one who engraved the work of Velázquez22 were to do a fine etching of them. Be that as it may, I believe it’s still more our duty to try to admire and to know things for ourselves than to teach them to others. But the two things can go together. I envy the Japanese the extreme clarity that everything in their work has. It’s never dull, and never appears to be done too hastily. Their work is as simple as breathing, and they do a figure with a few confident strokes with the same ease as if it was as simple as buttoning your waistcoat. Ah, I must manage to do a figure with a few strokes. That will keep me busy all winter. Once I have that, I’ll be able to do people strolling along the boulevards, the streets, a host of new subjects. While I’ve been writing you this letter, I’ve drawn a good dozen of them. I’m on the track of finding it. But it’s very complicated, because what I’m after is that in a few strokes the figure of a man, a woman, a kid, a horse, a dog, will have a head, a body, legs, arms that will fit together. More soon, and good handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I have to thank you very much for Tasset’s consignment of canvases and colours, which arrived in good condition and this time in postal parcels. I already told you in my last letter that autumn had shown itself in rain and bad weather. That inconvenienced me a bit, but in the sunny intervals I still managed to finish a no. 30 canvas of ploughed fields.  A blue sky with white clouds. An immense field of an ashy lilac, furrows, innumerable clods of earth, the horizon of blue hills and green bushes and small farmsteads with orange-coloured roofs.
   It’s another of those that’ll take a long time to dry; with impasto paintings you have to do the same as with the strongest wine, it has to ferment. So I’ve ordered a frame in white deal for that one. As long as autumn lasts I won’t have enough hands, canvas or colours to paint the beautiful things that I see. I’m also working on the portrait of Milliet, but he poses badly, or else it’s my fault, which I don’t believe, however, because I badly need some studies of him because he’s good-looking, very jaunty, very easy-going in his appearance, and he’d suit me down to the ground for a painting of lovers. I’ve already promised him a study for his trouble, but there you are, he can’t keep still. On top of that, he hardly has any time, since he’ll have to say his tender farewells to all the tarts and other pond-life in the Arles stewpond, now that his prick has gone back to the garrison, as he puts it. I don’t object to that at all; however, I regret that he has a nervous movement in his legs when he poses. He’s a good lad, but he’s only 25 years old, 10 fewer than me for Christ’s sake — and in ten years — according to Ziem, I’m afraid if he carries on like that, being unable to get a hard-on any more, he may join the ambitious.
   I shouldn’t be surprised if deep down he was annoyed at having to leave, and perhaps he’s exceeding his budget and that’s the reason he’s forced to go back to Africa. I know only one serious fault in him, that’s liking Mr Georges Ohnet’s L’abbé Constantin, and I’ve told him that he would do a thousand times better to read Guy de Maupassant’s Bel-ami. What does père Tanguy say now about coarse colours? I think I should warn you right away that I’ll need another 5 or even 10 metres of canvas. And that at the same time I’ll also need 

3
large tubes like the silver


and zinc white, 10 of Prussian blue


6
large 
tubes 
ditto 
ditto
 
Chrome 
I 
lemon


6
,,
,,
ditto
ditto
 
,,
II
 


2
,,
,,
ditto
ditto
 
,,
III
 


6
,,
,,
ditto
ditto
 
Veronese Green


and 
6 
 
medium tubes Geranium Lake


12
zinc white, large tubes


12
silver  ,,


 That’s approximately in proportion to the canvas. As I’ve just received the consignment of both canvas and colours, you’ll understand how little urgency there is, 
   but that’s only the minimum of what I calculate I’ll need during the autumn and leaf-fall, which will surely be amazing and which, as you know, lasts only a week. I’m sure I’ll be able to get some good work done then, and I wouldn’t like to be right out of yellow and blue at that time. In case you’re hard up, I can manage perfectly well without the expensive blues and the carmine. 1 tube of Prussian blue goes as far as 6 ultramarine or cobalt and costs 3 times less. Now, it fades to a certain extent, but by using zinc white and using it unmixed, I can do without the rest, if it comes to it. Delacroix swore by that vulgar blue, and used it a lot. So I’m alerting you to this state of affairs, although we’re a good way away from that famous leaf-fall. As long as the autumn lasts, I need to work like a team of mules if I want to recoup what our furnishing has cost. 
   I wanted to do more sunflowers too, but they were already over. Yes, during the autumn I’d very much like to do a dozen or so square no. 30 canvases, and that may very well be achieved, as far as I can see. I have a terrible clarity of mind at times, when nature is so lovely these days, and then I’m no longer aware of myself and the painting comes to me as if in a dream. I am indeed somewhat fearful that that will have its reaction in melancholy when the bad season comes, but I’ll try to get away from it by studying this question of drawing figures from memory. I’m always frustrated in my best abilities by the lack of models, but I don’t dwell on it — I do landscape and colour without worrying where that will take me. I know this, that if I went to beg models: but please pose for me, I beseech you, I would be behaving like Zola’s good painter in L’oeuvre. And certainly Manet, for example, didn’t do that. And Zola doesn’t say in his book what those people did who saw nothing supernatural in the painting. But let’s not criticize Zola’s book. I’ll send you five drawings by Bernard, of the same kind as the others.
   I wrote to him that, Gauguin not having stated categorically whether he’ll come or not come, I couldn’t offer Bernard hospitality for free, or even paid for with paintings or drawings. That his board alone here would, in any case, cost him a little more than board and lodging at the place where he is at present. Unless, though, we were to make savings eating at the studio, with or without Gauguin. But that in any case, I wasn’t urging him to come. That, as I definitely plan to spend the winter here, his company would of course be very welcome to me, but that above all, it was important that he do his sums carefully. If in the next few days, Gauguin writes to you categorically, either to you or to me, we could still see about Bernard. It seems to me that it would definitely suit Bernard’s book here, but his father would have to be a touch more magnanimous towards him. Because Bernard takes pains. However, I don’t like these drawings as much as the previous ones. At the beginning of next month there’ll be another heap of things falling on my back all together: 
   the frames and stretching frames that I’m having made here for the decoration of the house, at the same time as the month’s rent and the charwoman. But I can put off taking delivery of the frames and stretching frames, and so I’ll get by, I hope, in any case. The only hope I have is that by working really hard, by the end of a year I’ll have enough paintings to be able to show myself — if I wish, or if you so desire — at that time of the exhibition. I’m not keen on it, but what I’m certainly keen on is to show you something that isn’t entirely bad. I would not exhibit, but should we have work by me in the house that would prove that we’re neither cowards nor idlers, I’d be content. But the main thing seems to me to be that I shouldn’t put myself to less trouble than painters who work specifically for that. Whether we exhibit, whether we don’t exhibit, we must be productive, and after that we have the right to smoke our pipe in peace. But this year we’ll be productive, and I’m doing all I can to make sure that the new series is better than the first two consignments. And among the studies there’ll be some, I hope, that may be paintings, that is, ... For the starry sky, I still very much hope to paint it, and perhaps one of these evenings I’ll be in the same ploughed field, if the sky is twinkling brightly. Tolstoy’s book, Ma religion, was published in French as long ago as 1885, but I’ve never seen it in any catalogue. 
   He doesn’t seem to believe much in resurrection, either of the body or of the soul. In particular, he seems not to believe much in heaven — so he argues things like a nihilist — but — in a certain sense in opposition to them — he attaches great importance to doing well whatever one does, since that’s probably all one has. And even if he doesn’t believe in resurrection, he appears to believe in the equivalent — the continuance of human life — the march of humanity, the man and the work almost inevitably carried on by the humanity of the next generation. In short, it mustn’t be ephemeral consolations that he offers. A gentleman himself, he became a manual worker, knows how to make boots, knows how to mend stoves, knows how to handle a plough and dig the earth. Now I know nothing about any of that, but I know how to respect a human soul with enough energy to remake itself like that. Dear God, we’ve well and truly no reason to complain about living in times when there seem to be nothing but idlers, when we live at the same time as such specimens of poor mortals who don’t even believe very strongly in heaven itself.  He believes — I’ve perhaps written you it already, in non-violent revolution, through the need for love and religious feeling which must manifest itself in people as a reaction against scepticism and desperate and appalling suffering. More soon. As your last letter was on Friday, if I had your next news by Friday as well, that would be darned good. But there’s no hurry, it’ll be fine just as it turns out. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m well aware that I wrote to you only yesterday, but the day has been so beautiful again. My great sorrow is that you can’t see what I see here. From 7 o’clock in the morning I sat in front of what was, after all, nothing special — a round cedar or cypress bush — planted in grass. You know this round bush already, since you already have a study of the garden. By the way, included herewith a croquis of my canvas — a square no. 30 again. The bush is a variegated green, slightly tinged with bronze, the grass is very, very green, Veronese tinged with lemon, the sky is very, very blue. The line of bushes in the background are all raving mad oleanders. These bloody plants flower in such a way that they could surely catch locomotor ataxia! They’re covered in fresh blooms, and then in masses of faded blooms; their foliage also keeps on putting out strong new shoots, apparently inexhaustibly. A funereal cypress, completely black, stands above them and a number of small coloured figures are strolling along a pink path. It makes a pendant for another no. 30 canvas of the same place, only from a quite different viewpoint, in which the whole garden is coloured in very different greens under a pale lemon yellow sky.
   But isn’t it true that this garden has a funny sort of style that means that you can very well imagine the Renaissance poets, Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio, strolling among these bushes on the flowery grass? Now it’s true that I’ve left out some trees, but what I’ve kept in the composition is really like that. Only they’ve overcrowded it with a number of bushes that aren’t in character; and so to find this truer and more fundamental character, this is the third time I’m painting the same spot. Now that’s the garden that’s right in front of my house, after all. But this corner of a garden is a good example of what I was telling you, that to find the real character of things here, you have to look at them and paint them for a very long time. Because perhaps you’ll see from the sketch alone that the line is now simple. Again, this painting is heavily impasted, like its pendant with yellow sky. Tomorrow I hope to work with Milliet again. Today I worked again from 7 o’clock in the morning until 6 o’clock in the evening without moving except to eat a bite a stone’s throw away. And that’s why the work’s going fast. But what will you say about it — how will it seem to me, too, some time from now? 
   At the moment I have a clear head, or a lover’s blindness toward my work. Because being surrounded by colour like this is quite new to me, and excites me extraordinarily. Fatigue doesn’t come into it; I could do another painting tonight, even, and I could bring it home. If I tell you that it’s very urgent that I receive 


6
large 
tubes 
lemon chrome yellow I 

large tubes 
    like the zinc and 
    silver white


6
,,
,,
Veronese green


3
,,
,,
Prussian blue.


10
,,
,,
zinc white


 then it’s to be deducted from yesterday’s order. Also 5 metres of canvas. I can’t help it, I feel in a clear frame of mind and I want as far as possible to make sure that I have enough paintings to maintain my position when the others will also be making a great effort for the year ’89. Seurat has enough, with 2 or 3 of his enormous canvases, to exhibit all by himself; Signac, who’s a good worker, also has enough, Gauguin too, and Guillaumin. So I’d like, myself, to have by that time — whether we were to exhibit it or not — the series of studies: Decoration. That way we’ll be entirely original, because the others won’t be able to find us pretentious when that’s all we have. 
   But be assured that I’ll try to give it a style. Milliet was pleased today that I’d done the ploughed field;11 usually he doesn’t like what I do, but because the clods of earth were soft in colour, like a pair of clogs, it didn’t offend him — with the forget-me-not sky with its flecks of white cloud. If he posed better he would please me greatly, and he would have a smarter portrait than I’ll be able do now, although the subject itself is beautiful: his face with its pale, matt complexion, the red képi against an emerald background. Ah, how I’d like you to see everything that I see these days! With so many beautiful things before me, I can’t help letting myself go. Especially because I feel that it’ll turn out a little better than the last consignment. But the last consignment was of studies that made me ready to be able to work with confidence these days that are windless. Why is it that our good père Thomas isn’t willing to lend me something on my studies? He’d be wrong not to do it — and I hope that he will do it. I’m fearful of overburdening you, and yet I’d like to order a good two hundred francs worth of colours and canvases and brushes. It’s not for something else, it’s for that. The whole autumn may be good, and if I knock out a 
   no. 30 canvas every two or three days, I’ll earn blenty of thousand-frenk pills. I have a concentrated strength still, which asks for nothing but to be used up in work. But I’ll inevitably begin to use up a quantity of colours, and that’s why we’d need Thomas. If I continue working as I am these days, I’ll have my study full of really sound studies, the way it is at Guillaumin’s. Guillaumin must have some fine new things, of course, I don’t doubt it and I’d very much like to see them. The present studies actually consist of a single flow of impasto. The brushstroke isn’t greatly divided, and the tones are often broken. And in the end, without intending to, I’m forced to lay the paint on thickly, à la Monticelli. Sometimes I really believe I’m continuing that man’s work, only I haven’t yet done figures of lovers, like him. And it’s probable that I won’t do it, either, before some serious studies from life. But that’s not urgent; now I’m determined to work hard until I’ve surmounted it. If I want this letter to go off, I must hurry. Have you any news of Gauguin? I expect a letter from Bernard at any moment, which will follow the croquis, probably. Gauguin must have another partnership in mind; I’ve felt that for weeks and yet more weeks. 
   He’s certainly free to do so. Being alone won’t bother me for the time being, and later on we’ll find some company anyway, and perhaps more than we’ll want. Only I believe that we mustn’t say anything unpleasant to Gauguin if he were to change his mind, and take the thing entirely in good part. Because if he joins up with Laval, that’s only fair, since Laval’s his pupil and they’ve already kept house together. If it came to it, well, they could both come here and we’d find a way of putting them up. As for the furnishing, if I’d known in advance that Gauguin wasn’t coming, I’d still have wanted to have two beds in case I had to put someone up. So he’s definitely quite free. There will always be those who have a wish to see the south. What has Vignon been doing?? Ah well, if it all turns out for the best everyone will be sure to make great progress, and me too. If you can’t see the beautiful days here, you’ll still see the paintings of them. And I’m trying to make them better than the others. Handshake and Ever yours, Vincent. 
    My dear Theo, Thank you very much for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. It’s not a rosy prospect that the pains in your leg have come back — my God — it should have to be possible for you to live in the south as well, because I always think that what we need is sunshine and fine weather and blue air as the most dependable remedy. The weather’s still fine here, and if it was always like that it would be better than the painters’ paradise, it would be Japan altogether. How I think of you and of Gauguin and of Bernard, everywhere and at all times! It’s so beautiful, and I’d so much like to see everyone over here. Included herewith little croquis of a square no. 30 canvas — the starry sky at last, actually painted at night, under a gas-lamp. The sky is green-blue, the water is royal blue, the areas of land are mauve. The town is blue and violet. The gaslight is yellow, and its reflections are red gold and go right down to green bronze. Against the green-blue field of the sky the Great Bear has a green and pink sparkle whose discreet paleness contrasts with the harsh gold of the gaslight. Two small coloured figures of lovers in the foreground.
   Likewise croquis of a square no. 30 canvas showing the house and its surroundings under a sulphur sun, under a pure cobalt sky. That’s a really difficult subject! But I want to conquer it for that very reason. Because it’s tremendous, these yellow houses in the sunlight and then the incomparable freshness of the blue. All the ground’s yellow, too. I’ll send you another, better drawing of it than this croquis from memory;2 the house to the left is pink, with green shutters; the one that’s shaded by a tree, that’s the restaurant where I go to eat supper every day. My friend the postman lives at the bottom of the street on the left, between the two railway bridges. The night café that I painted isn’t in the painting; it’s to the left of the restaurant. Milliet finds it horrible, but I don’t need to tell you that when he says he can’t understand that someone can enjoy doing such an ordinary grocer’s shop, and such stiff, square houses with no charm at all, I reflect that Zola did a certain boulevard at the beginning of L’assommoir7 and Flaubert a corner of quai de la Villette in the summer heat, at the beginning of Bouvard et Pécuchet, that aren’t half bad. And it does me good to do what’s difficult. That doesn’t stop me having a tremendous need for, shall I say the word — for religion — so I go outside at night to paint the stars, and I always dream a painting like that, with a group of lively figures of the pals. Now I have a letter from Gauguin, who seems very sad and says he’ll definitely come once he’s made a sale, but still doesn’t commit himself as to whether, if he had his fare paid, he would simply agree to untangle himself over there. 
   He says that the people where he’s staying are and have been faultless towards him, and that to leave them like that would be a bad deed. But that I turn a dagger in his heart if I were to believe that he wouldn’t come straightaway if he could. And furthermore, that if you could sell his canvases cheaply, he for one would be happy. I’ll send you his letter with the reply. Certainly, his arrival would increase the importance of this venture of painting in the south by 100 per cent. And once here, I don’t see him leaving soon, because I believe he would put down roots. And I always say to myself that with his collaboration, what you do in private10 would eventually be a more considerable thing than my work on my own; you would have more satisfaction without an increase in expenses. Later, if some day you were perhaps established on your own account with Impressionist paintings, we’d only have to continue and to expand what exists at present. Lastly, Gauguin says that Laval has found someone who’ll give him 150 francs a month, for a year at least, and that Laval will perhaps also come in February. And I having written to Bernard that I believed that he couldn’t live on less than 3. or 4 francs a day in the south, for board and lodging alone, he says that he believes that for 200 francs a month there would be board and lodging for all 3, which isn’t impossible, by the way, living and eating at the studio. This Benedictine priest must have been very interesting. What, in his opinion, is the religion of the future likely to be? He’ll probably say, still the same as the past. Victor Hugo says, God is a lighthouse whose beam flashes on and off, and so now, of course, we’re passing through that darkness. My only wish is that they could manage to prove something that would be calming to us, that would console us so that we’d cease to feel guilty or unhappy, and that just as we 
   are we could proceed without getting lost in loneliness or nothingness, and without having at each step to fear or nervously calculate the harm which, without wishing to, we might cause others. That odd fellow, Giotto, whose biography said that he was always unwell, and always full of ardour and ideas. Well, I’d like to be able to attain that self-confidence that makes a person happy, cheerful and lively at all times. That can happen much more easily in the country or a small town than in that Parisian furnace. I wouldn’t be surprised if you liked the starry night and the ploughed fields15 — they’re calmer than some other canvases. If the work always went like that I’d have fewer worries about money, because people would come to it more easily if the technique continued to be more harmonious. But this bloody mistral is a real nuisance for doing brushstrokes that hold together and intertwine well, with feeling, like a piece of music played with emotion. With this quiet weather, I let myself go and I have less need to struggle against impossibilities. Tanguy’s consignment has arrived and I thank you for it very, very much, because this way I hope to be able to do something during the autumn for the next exhibition. What’s most urgent now is 5 or even 10 metres of canvas. I’ll write to you again and will send you Gauguin’s letter with the reply. Very interesting what you say about Maurin; at 40 francs his drawings are certainly not dear. More and more I believe that we must believe that true and fair dealing in paintings is to follow one’s taste, one’s education looking at the masters, one’s faith, in a word. It is no easier, I’m convinced, to make a good painting than to find a diamond or a pearl; it requires effort, and you stake your life as a dealer or an artist on it. So once you have good stones, it’s important not to lack faith in yourself either, but boldly keep things at a certain price. While waiting, however But all the same, that thought gives me courage to work, while, however, I naturally suffer from the fact of having to spend money. But this thought of the pearl came to me right in the midst of my suffering, and I wouldn’t be surprised if it did you good, too, in your moments of discouragement. There are no more good paintings than there are diamonds.
   And there’s absolutely nothing dishonest about dealing in good stones. One can believe in oneself when the thing one’s selling is good. Now if, though, people like paste, they’re at liberty to do so, and since they ask for it, well, one may keep it in stock. But that isn’t enough to feel one is oneself – with good paintings, though, one can feel one is oneself and be firm, because it’s a pure error to think that there are as many as one wishes. Perhaps I express myself badly, but I’ve thought about it a lot lately, and calm has come to me about the Gauguin business.  All these Gauguins are good stones, and let’s boldly be the dealers in Gauguins. Milliet greets you warmly, I have his portrait now, with the red képi against an emerald background, and in this background the emblem of his regiment, the crescent and a 5-pointed star.  Good handshake and more soon, and thank you very much, and I hope your pains won’t last. Have you seen a doctor again? Look after yourself, because physical pain is so annoying. Ever yours, Vincent 
   
   My dear Theo, Included herewith a quite, quite remarkable letter from Gauguin, which I’ll ask you to put aside as being of extraordinary importance. I’m speaking of his description of himself, which touches me in my heart of hearts. It reached me with a letter from Bernard, which Gauguin will probably have read and of which he perhaps approves, in which Bernard again says that he wishes to come here, and proposes to me, in the names of Laval, Moret, another new one2 and himself, an exchange with the four of them. He also says that Laval will come too, and that those two others have a wish to come. I couldn’t ask for more, but when it’s a matter of several painters living communally, I stipulate first and foremost that there would have to be a father superior to impose order, and that naturally that would be Gauguin. That’s why I’d wish Gauguin to be here some time before them (in any case, Bernard and Laval won’t come until February, as Bernard has to go before his recruitment medical board). For my part, I wish for two things: I wish to earn back the money that I’ve already spent, to return it to you, and I wish Gauguin to have his peace and quiet to produce and to breathe as a truly free artist. If I earn back the money already spent and that you’ve been lending me for years, we’ll make the thing bigger and we’ll try to found a studio of renaissance, not of decline. 
   I’m fairly sure that we could count on Gauguin’s staying with us for good, and that there’ll be no loss on either side. But by joining together in this way, we’ll each of us be more ourselves, and unity will bring strength.  By the way, it goes without saying that I shan’t do the exchange with G.’s portrait, because I think it’ll be too beautiful — but I’ll ask him to let us have it for his first month6 or in repayment of his fare. But you can clearly see that if I hadn’t written to them rather strongly, this portrait wouldn’t exist, and Bernard has done one too, so: Let’s agree that I was angry, let’s agree that it was wrong, but it’s still the case that Gauguin has given birth to a painting, and Bernard as well. Ah — my study of the vineyards — I sweated blood and tears over it — but I have it — another square no. 30 canvas — once again for the decoration of the house. I have no canvas left at all. Do you know that if we have Gauguin, there we’ll be, at the start of a very important affair, which will open up a new era for us. When I left you at the Gare du Midi, very upset and almost ill and almost an alcoholic as a result of overdoing it — I’ve always vaguely felt that last winter we put our very hearts into our discussions with so many interesting people and artists, but I didn’t dare to hope yet. After constant effort on your part and mine until now, it’s beginning to appear on the horizon: Hope. It doesn’t make any difference whether you stay with the Goupils or not, you’ll stand solidly behind Gauguin and his crowd. 
   That way, you’ll be one of the first apostle-dealers, or the first. For myself, I can see my painting ahead, and also a labour among artists. Because if you, now, will try to obtain money for us — I myself will put everything that comes within my grasp towards production, and I’ll set an example of that myself. Now all that, if we hold firm, will go to build something more durable than ourselves. I have to reply to Gauguin and to Bernard this afternoon, and I’m going to tell them that whatever happens, we’ll begin by feeling firmly united and that I for one have confidence that this unity will be our strength against the inevitabilities of money and of health. I’ll ask you to go and see Thomas all the same, because before Gauguin comes I’d like to buy some more things — the following. 


dressing table with chest of drawers
 
40 francs
 


4 sheets
 
40 -
 


3 drawing boards
 
12 -
 


kitchen stove
 
60
 


(
Frames and stretching frames
 
50  )
 


(
Colours and canvases
 
200)
 


 Now that’s a lot, and none of it is absolutely indispensable. We can do without all of it. But the broader and more substantial character that I’d wish to give the thing would nevertheless demand it. 
   For example, the 4 additional sheets — I already have 4 — will make it possible for us to put Bernard up for nothing, seeing that we’ll put a palliasse or a mattress on the floor for me or for him, as we choose. The kitchen stove will heat the studio for us at the same time. But, you’ll say — and these colours Ah, well, yes, I blame myself for it — but after all, I have the self-esteem to wish to make a certain impression on Gauguin with my work. I can’t help wishing to work on my own as much as possible before he comes. His arrival will change me in my way of painting, and I’ll gain by it, I dare believe — but all the same, I’m rather attached to my decoration, which is almost barbotine. And these recent days are superb. There are 10 no. 30 canvases on the go now. Gauguin’s fare, then. We’d have to add it on top. But if Thomas isn’t willing to act a little generously, Gauguin’s fare first and foremost, to the detriment of your pocket and of mine. FIRST AND FOREMOST.  All this expenditure that I’ve mentioned would all be for the purpose of making a good impression on him at the time of his arrival. I’d like him to have a sense of the thing right away, and I’d like us to have — you for the money and I for the setting up and arrangement — made the studio complete, and such that it’s a setting worthy of Gauguin, the artist, who’s going to be its head. 
   It would be a good move, like the one back then, when Corot, seeing Daumier at bay, gave him enough to live on, in such a way that the other was well pleased with everything. But it can already work now, just as it is. The fare’s the essential thing, and my colours can wait, although I dare believe that one day I’ll earn more with them than they’re costing us. I wouldn’t disapprove in the very least if Gauguin gave you a monopoly in his work, and if right away, right away we raised his prices — nothing under 500. He should have confidence in you — well, he’ll have it. I feel that we’re working on a big, good enterprise that has nothing in common with the old way of doing business. As for colours, it’s almost certain that with Gauguin we’ll grind it ourselves. I’ve painted the vineyards entirely with Tanguy’s colours, and it works well, the coarser grain’s no problem at all. If we continue to approach things from the right point of view, that’s to say of people and not of material things, it still seems not entirely improbable to me that our material problems may smooth themselves out. Because one matures in the storm. I’m continuing to frame studies, because they’re part of the furnishings and give things character. If Gauguin gives the monopoly, and does so both officially, as you’re with the Goupils, and in private, as your friend and someone in your debt, then in return Gauguin will be able to feel himself head of the studio, and control the money 
   as he’ll see fit, and if it can be done, help Bernard, Laval, others, in exchange for studies or paintings, while I’ll be under the same conditions, I’ll give studies in return for 100 francs and my share of canvas and colours. But the more Gauguin feels that by joining us he’ll have the position of head of a studio, the sooner he’ll recover and the keener he’ll be to work. Now the more finished the studio is, and firmly established for the use of many passing visitors, the more ideas will come to him, and the ambition to make it truly alive. Since they’re talking about nothing else at Pont-Aven at the moment, they’ll talk about it in Paris, too; and once again, the better it is, the more firmly established it is, so much the better, before long, will be the general impression created, and the chance that it will work. Ah, well, it’ll turn out as it’ll turn out. I only say that from now, in order to avoid future arguments, if it works in such a way that Laval, Bernard do in fact come, it won’t be me but it will be Gauguin who’ll be the head of the studio. As far as internal arrangements are concerned, I believe that we’ll be in agreement in any case.  I hope that on Friday I’ll have your next letter. Bernard’s letter is once again full of the conviction that Gauguin is a truly great master, and an absolutely superior man in terms of character and intelligence. Good handshake, and more soon. Ever yours, Vincent  The vines that I’ve just painted — are green, purple, yellow — with bunches of violet grapes, with black and orange shoots. On the horizon, some blue-grey willows, and the press-house far, far away, with a red roof, and silhouette of town in the distance, lilac. In the vineyard, little figures of ladies with red sunshades and other little figures of grape-pickers with their cart. A blue sky above and a foreground of grey sand. It makes a pendant for the garden with the round bush and the oleanders. I believe that you’d prefer these 10 canvases to the whole of the last consignment, and I dare hope to do as many again during the autumn. 
   It’s becoming even richer day by day. And when at leaf-fall — I don’t know if that happens here in the first days of November, as at home — when all the foliage of the trees is yellow, it will be something marvellous, against the blue. Ziem has shown us these glories many times already. Then a short winter — and afterwards we’ll be back to the orchards in blossom again. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for your letter. How happy I am for Gauguin; I won’t search for expressions to tell you so — let’s be of bold good heart!1 Now I’ve just received Gauguin’s portrait done by himself and Bernard’s portrait by Bernard, with B.’s portrait on the wall in the background of G.’s portrait, and vice versa. The Gauguin is immediately remarkable, but I myself like Bernard’s very much, it’s nothing but an idea of a painter, some cursory tones, some blackish lines, but it’s as stylish as real, real Manet. The Gauguin is more studied, taken further. That’s what he says in his letter, and for me it certainly has above all the effect of representing a prisoner. Not a hint of cheerfulness. It’s not flesh in the very least, but we can boldly put that down to his intention to make something melancholy; the flesh in the shadows is lugubriously tinged with blue. And now at last I have a chance to compare my painting with that of the pals. My portrait that I’m sending to Gauguin in exchange stands up beside it, I’m sure. I wrote to Gauguin in reply to his letter that if I too was allowed to enhance my personality in a portrait, trying to show in my portrait not only myself but an Impressionist in general, I had conceived this portrait as being that of a bonze, a simple worshipper of the eternal Buddha.
   And when I put Gauguin’s conception and mine side by side, my portrait is equally serious but less desperate. What Gauguin’s portrait says to me, first and foremost, is that he mustn’t go on that way, he must console himself, he must become the richer Gauguin of the negresses again. I’m very pleased to have these two portraits, which faithfully depict for us the pals at this time — they won’t stay like that, they’ll return to the more serene life. And I have the clear sense that the duty has been imposed on me of doing all I can to reduce our poverty. That counts for nothing in the profession of painting. I feel that he’s more Millet than I am, but I’m more Diaz than he is, and like Diaz, I’ll try to please the public so that some sous may come into the community. I’ve spent more than them; seeing their painting, that makes absolutely no odds to me, they’ve worked in too much poverty to make it catch on. 
   Because wait — I have better things than what I’ve sent you, and more saleable, and I feel that I can continue to make more. I have confidence in that, at last. I know that it’ll do certain people good to find poetic subjects — the starry sky — The vine-branches — the furrows — the poet’s garden. Well then, I believe your duty as well as mine is to wish for comparative wealth, precisely because we’ll have some very great artists to feed. But at present you’re as happy, or at least happy in the same way as Sensier, if you have Gauguin, and I sincerely hope that he’ll go for it. It’s not urgent, but in any case I believe that he’ll like the house as his studio well enough to agree to be its head. Let’s wait half a year and see what comes of it. Bernard has sent me another collection of ten or so drawings, with a gallant piece of verse — the whole thing’s entitled ‘at the brothel’. You’ll see these things soon, but I’ll send you the portraits after looking at them for some time. 
    I hope you’ll send me your letter soon; I’m very hard up because of the stretching frames and frames that I’ve ordered. What you say about Fréret pleases me. But I dare believe that I’ll do things that will please him more, and you, too. Yesterday I painted a sunset. Gauguin looks ill and tormented in his portrait!! Look, that won’t last, and it will be very curious to compare this portrait to the one of himself that he’ll do in half a year. One day you’ll also see the portrait of me that I’m sending to Gauguin, because he’ll keep it, I hope. It’s all ashy against pale Veronese (no yellow). The clothing is that brown jacket trimmed with blue, but in which I’ve exaggerated the brown into purple, and the width of the blue trim. The head is modelled in light-coloured thick impasto against a light-coloured background with almost no shadows. But I’ve slightly slanted the eyes in the Japanese manner. Write to me soon, and the best of luck. How happy old Gauguin will be! Good handshake, and thank Fréret for coming, which pleased me greatly. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   As for what Gauguin says about ‘Persian’, it’s true, I don’t believe it would be shocking, placed in the Dieulafoy Museum; it could be placed there with no problem. But but but... I belong neither to high society nor even to society and — I prefer both the Greeks and the Japanese to the Persians and Egyptians. For all that, I’m not saying that Gauguin’s wrong to work in the Persian style. But I’ll have to get used to it. My dear Theo, I too have all my attention on Gauguin at the moment. And like you, I’m hoping that he’ll come now. THAT’S A REALLY GOOD ONE, ABOUT BAGUE!  Not that that amazes me, but I’m pleased for Bague, whom I’ve always respected — good rascal!1 Well, if you see him — and if not, just be bold and go and see him — and tell him that I’ve told you I have here a starry night, the furrows, the poet’s garden — the vineyard. So, poetic landscapes. Don’t make too much of the studies, which certainly take more trouble to do but are less saleable. If you’d sent me 2003 francs I would have gone to do the same thing with the sea at Saintes-Maries. We have the full pitiless mistral here at the moment — it’s very bad for work. But after all, we’ll have more fine weather before the winter, properly speaking, and in any case I hope to add more to the series that I have on the go. 
   Do you know what I have left now, today, of your remittance that came today? Well, I have 6 francs left. I had asked you to send to me on Friday, and it wasn’t until four days later (midday on Monday) that I received your letter. It’s mostly the fault of the frames that I once ordered, and to which I’m very attached. I can’t finish off except in a frame. And besides, perhaps we’ll work with them in Marseille. I have three woods, walnut — chestnut — deal, for the frames. And I ask you to please give Bague my warm regards, if you see him, and tell him that I recommend to him my vineyard and my starry night. And the same thing to Tripp. Didn’t they buy a lot from Mauve, didn’t they even buy Mauve’s last large watercolours at a good price? I don’t know, it’s been so long since I knew them. 
   But in the past I never quarrelled either with Tripp or with Bague. Only, while not making too much of the two previous consignments, tell Bague that I’m very pleased that he’s bought this study, and as long as the autumn remains favourable I’m now doing studies which I’ll ask him to come and see when we send them with some Gauguins. As for Thomas, I believe that you’re doing the right thing by going to see him. I’ve just written you that when everything’s paid for I have 6 francs left. Is that enough for a week — no. I therefore really beg you to send me, and I beg you to do it by return of post, one louis. That will make 26 francs for the week, and that way I’ll get by. But don’t delay. What’s more, I must be ready for work as soon as the fine weather comes along. We have a really pitiless mistral but I have to be ready; work gets done in the short intervals. And so everything has to be in order and ready to join battle. 
   Tasset hasn’t sent the canvas. It’s very, very urgent; please order 10 or at least 5 metres of it immediately. It’s very urgent because I already bought some canvas here just today, in order to be ready for tomorrow or the day after, depending on what the weather’s like. Here the fact is that you have to take advantage of the intervals the mistral leaves, and be ready beforehand. My dear Theo, a thousand thanks for both the consignment of colours and for today’s letter. Work absorbs me, and I feel certain of not losing by it if I can continue like this. These large canvases are all good. But they’re exhausting, too. Included herewith a letter from yesterday that I’m sending as it is. You’ll see in it what I think of Gauguin’s portrait. Too dark, too sad. I’m not saying I don’t like it as such, but he’ll change, and must come. Yes indeed, they do spend less than me, yes — but — if I was in a threesome, like them — by spending a little more — it would be better. Once again — it’s important not to draw with Prussian blue in the flesh areas! Because then it ceases to be flesh, it becomes wood!9 And as for G., he has nothing more pressing nor better to do than to join me. However, I dare believe that in terms of coloration the other Breton paintings are superior to this portrait that he’s sending me, done in haste, in fact. And am far from judging those studies; however, you’ll see for yourself. Look, if you can, don’t let me kick my heels for the whole week. If you can do it, send me another louis. I hardly know what to do, otherwise. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   Don’t believe that I’m exaggerating about the Gauguin portrait, nor about Gauguin himself. He needs to eat, to walk with me in some beautiful countryside — to have a screw once in a while — see the house as it is and as we’ll make it, and in a word, thoroughly enjoy himself. He’s been living cheaply, yes, but it’s been making him ill to the point where he can no longer distinguish a cheerful tone from a sad tone. Ah well, that’s no use at all. It’s high time he came, and then you’ll see, he’ll get better in no time. In the meantime, forgive me too if I overstep my budget. I’ll work all the more, I assure you. But I have a horror a thousand thousand times of these melancholies à la Meryon!!!10 (I was so busy from Thursday on, that from Thursday to Monday I had only two meals; apart from that I had only bread and coffee, which I had to drink on credit too, and for which I was due to pay today. So if you can, don’t delay at all.) 
   One day you’ll see the two portraits of G. and of Bernard. And you’ll compare with the negresses. And you’ll see that it’s vital that he cheers up now. Or otherwise But no otherwise; let’s assume — he’ll cheer up. But it’s certainly high time. I’m writing to you in haste; I’m working on a portrait. That’s to say, I’m doing a portrait of our mother for myself. I can’t look at the colourless photograph, and I’m trying to do one with harmonious colour, as I see her in my memory. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent Don’t delay — if it doesn’t leave you too hard up — don’t delay in sending me the louis and the canvas. 
   My dear Theo, Thank you for your letter, but I was really kicking my heels this time; my money ran out on Thursday, so until midday on Monday it was damned long. Throughout those 4 days I lived mainly on 2314 coffees, with bread, and for which I still have to pay. It’s not your fault, it’s mine, if fault there is. Because I was frantic to see my paintings in frames, and I had ordered slightly too many for the budget, seeing that the month’s rent and the charwoman15 also had to be paid. It’s going to drain me dry, even today. Because I have to buy canvas too, and prepare it myself. As Tasset’s hasn’t yet arrived. Would you ask him at the earliest possible moment if he’s sent it, 10 metres or at least 5 metres of ordinary canvas at 2. francs? But this wouldn’t matter to me, my dear brother, if I didn’t feel that you yourself must be suffering from this pressure that work exerts over us at present. But I dare believe that if you saw the studies you’d give me a motive to work ‘at white-heat’ as long as the weather’s fine — which isn’t the case these past few days — merciless mistral that sweeps the dead leaves with fury. But between this and the winter there’ll be another spell of magnificent weather and effects, and then once again it will be a matter of making an all-out effort. I’m so immersed in work that I can’t stop dead. Don’t worry, the bad weather will stop me only too soon. As it has already done today, yesterday and the day before yesterday. For your part, please try to persuade Thomas. He’ll do something in any case. Do you know what I have left today for my week, 
   and this after 4 days of strict fasting? Just 6 francs. And Monday’s the very day when I receive your letter. I ate at midday, but by this evening I’ll have to sup on a crust of bread. And it all goes into nothing else but either the house or the paintings. Because for at least 3 weeks I haven’t had enough to go and have a screw for 3 francs. That’s a really good one, about Bague!  If those gentlemen have been able to use Mauves as foils for Corots, it may be true and it may even be right. Because in fact, next to Corots, the Mauves, Mesdags, Marises are indeed ponderous. For all that, it’s none the less true that they’ve bought a lot of them, even 
   Mauve’s last watercolours. It was they who bought them, as we saw them there for framing at the framer’s who did Reid’s Monticellis. Bague, I’m almost sure of it, would like my large studies Starry sky, Furrows, &c. He’ll like some others in the last consignment much less. Something I like about Bague is that he likes thick, heavy impasto painting; I’ve heard him enough on that subject in the past. I have no expectation at all that they’ll buy, only you wouldn’t do badly to tell Bague that I have some large studies here — new ones — of autumn effects. And keep him on tenterhooks with that. I’d say, show him, and Thomas, the white orchard, the no. 30 canvas the harvest;17 not much else. We shouldn’t make a big thing of the studies, which take more trouble but which are less attractive than the paintings that are their outcome and fruit, and which one paints as if in a dream, and without suffering so much for it. For the two ‘Poet’s gardens’ I’ve had walnut frames made, which do very well. And now I’m looking for 
 0  a frame in yellowed chestnut. It’s as plain and simple as a slate frame, but the tone of the wood does well. Deal does well too, for the Furrows and the vineyard. If you were really kind you would send me one louis by return of post; I’d get through my week and I’d be safe from the ‘roller-coaster’ that came with the beginning of this month. Otherwise I’d be kicking my heels too long and wouldn’t have all my strength for the fine days that I’m hoping for at the end of the week, after the mistral. Enclosed herewith another letter that I’ve been writing these past few days about Gauguin’s portrait. I’m sending it to you because I don’t have the time to write it out again, but the main thing is that I emphasize this. That I do not like these horrors of the ‘work’, except in so far as they show us our way. Our way is not to endure them for ourselves, nor to make others endure them; on the contrary, this way  My dear Theo, Yesterday I sent you a telegram to ask you for another twenty francs. That’s all I’ll have to feed myself for the whole week, but at least I have my frames and a few stretching frames. Only for the next letter, it shouldn’t come later than Sunday, because the siege is hard, very hard, these days. But we’ll sit it out, and I feel quite calm in all this agitation that we’re going through. At the very moment when I wrote these words to you I received news of the arrival of Tasset’s canvas. Perfect! The walnut frames do well for the studies. And I believe that the next consignment will decide something, and that we’re on the point of selling. Let’s be prudent, and as we are let’s not move from the idea that not only for ourselves but also in order to make this studio succeed, we must regain the money spent during the unproductive years. With calmness we’ll do all that; besides, it’s our right, and we’ve suffered for it often enough. 
   But I beg you, try to be reconciled with the Bagues. That’s to say, we’re growing too old to struggle against the existing firms, and the best policy will probably be to continue very quietly from day to day. It costs a great deal of money to set up a new firm, and to make use of the existing ones, that costs nothing at all. So if you see Bague, explain to him that, coming to a countryside that was quite new to me, I began to do studies right and left, of which I’ve sent you two consignments. But that if there are paintings among them, there are 2 or three of them at most. So, the white orchard, the large pink orchard and the harvest with a ruin in the background. At present, though, I’m busy gathering my thoughts. The new things now, ah, they’re costing us dear and we won’t be very accommodating about selling them; they must bring in what they’re worth. Let’s hope we won’t be in too tight a corner; with patience it won’t be too difficult 
   for us to do the same as Mauve or Mesdag, who, being able to wait and keep things a little dearer, still sold. We’re sparing nothing of what we have, in order to obtain some rich effect of colour. And I believe that the idea of earning something as much for the pals as for ourselves will give us confidence. And in our business dealings, although we have no fixed plan, everything we do will nevertheless be based on that deep sense that we have of the present injustice suffered by the artists whom we know, and of the desire to change it as far as we can. With that idea, we can work with calmness and determination, and in short, we have nothing to fear from anyone. I’m working on a portrait of our mother because the black photograph was making me too impatient. Ah, what portraits we could make from life with photography and painting! I always have hopes that a great revolution still awaits us in portraiture. 
   I’m writing home to have our father’s portrait too. Myself, I don’t want black photographs, and yet I still want to have a portrait. The one of our mother, a no. 8 canvas, will be ashy, on a green background, and her clothes carmine. I don’t know if it will be a good resemblance, but I want an impression of blond colouring, at least. You’ll see it one day, and if you like I’ll do one for you too. It will be in heavy impasto again. Ah well, my dear Theo, for your next letter, let me have it on Sunday. Things will go well, I dare believe, because we’re on the point of selling all the same, and what I’m preparing now will put us in a position to show something at the time of the exhibition. It will be a year of hard work, but we’ll have good times afterwards, and even in the meantime. I’m doing a study of a brothel for Bernard, from memory. Did you see that my drawing, which I added to the Bernard drawings, shows the house? You’ll be able to form an idea of the colour. I have a no. 30 canvas of that drawing. Handshake, and many thanks for the canvas; now we’ll be able to join battle once more. Ever yours, Vincent. I’ll stick firmly to this, when this decoration on which I’m working is finished, it’ll have to be worth ten thousand, whether it’s easy for me or not; that’s my firm and fixed aim; we’ve spent money and it must come back to us. My dear Theo, Letter from Gauguin, to say that he pays me a heap of undeserved compliments, and to add that he won’t come until the end of the month. That he’s been ill... That he dreads the journey What can I do about it But come on, let’s see — is this journey so exhausting, then, when after all the worst consumptives do it??? When he comes he’ll be welcome. If he doesn’t come, well, then, it’s his business. But isn’t it clear, or shouldn’t it be, that he’s coming here precisely in order to get better? And he claims to need to stay over there in order to recover! What stupidities! Honestly. Thank you for your 20-franc money order. In my list of necessary purchases I said 35 francs for the chest of drawers-dressing table2 — well — I’ve just bought one for 14 francs and paid for it, of course. Send me these 14 francs by money order, please. 
   I was less hesitant about buying this piece of furniture because I want to be ready in case Gauguin were to come sooner. I send you copy of my reply to his rather over-complimentary letter. Since he’s not coming right away, all the more reason why I want to try to have everything in good order and ready to receive him the day he comes. I’ve done a new no. 30 canvas, and I plan to start another one this evening when they light the gas. The one I’ve just done is another garden. These last few days I always have the feeling of spending money, but every day too, it astonishes me to find it in the house. You know, it really does you good to come back to your own home, and it gives you ideas for work. Gauguin writes very amiably, but he doesn’t actually say why he isn’t coming right away. He says ‘because he’s ill’, but would he come here to recover? It seemed to me, precisely, that that was just what we were looking for. Ah well, let them do all that seems best to them. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Reply to Gauguin’s letter  My dear Gauguin. Thank you for your letter — truly too full of compliments for me. So you’re not coming until the end of the month. Perfect — seeing that it must appear to you that you’ll recover more quickly in Brittany than here. I won’t press the point. Only, if your recovery wasn’t going well in Brittany, then think about this, that we think we could get you well here more quickly than that. Look, everything is always for the best in this best of worlds — in which we have — still according to the excellent père Pangloss, the ineffable happiness of finding ourselves. In this case too, I have no doubt at all — all will be for the best. But is it inordinately true that the journey to Arles is as exhausting as you say? Come on. Because the worst consumptives do it. You know very well that the PLM6 is for that. Or are you even iller than you say? I fear so, and if there is reason to, reassure me on this subject, or else write frankly that you’re in a bad way, ill. 
   But you write business, you talk about lithography. Here’s my opinion. Making lithographs in the evening. You, me, Bernard, Laval fine — I’m in, of course — but as for their periodical publication I shall DEFINITELY NOT be in as long as I’m not any better off than now. I have more than enough with painting. In lithography one is always in for one’s money, even when not buying the stones. It wouldn’t cost too much — I’m not saying — but in the end, for a publication, however modest it might be, the four of us would be in for at least 50 francs ‘each’. And even then Tell me the opposite if you like, I’m not pressing the point, but anyway, I say what I say. I already have some little experience of an attempt. But the  even then... that I add, is that it wouldn’t last, and above all, wouldn’t catch on with the public, either. And we’d always continue to be in for our expenses. Even if we’re in for our expenses, if it comes to it, I’m still in for making these lithographs in question. On the other hand, I would never — even without expenses — be in favour of their publication. If it’s at our expense and for our own pleasure and use, then I repeat I’m in. Are you assuming something else?? I would not be in. Don’t tell me that it costs as little as that if it’s a question of publishing. Ever yours, Vincent So come as soon as you can, then! P.S. Did you receive my canvases??? P.S. to Gauguin:8 If you aren’t too ill, please come right away. If you are too ill, telegram and letter, please. You’ll perhaps find the P.S. to Gauguin too blunt, but it’s up to him to say yes or no. HE IS ill, but look, he’ll recover much better here, come on. My dear Theo, When lately I very often think that all the costs of painting weigh on you, you couldn’t imagine what anxiety I have about it. When things like what you describe about Bague1 in your last letter happen to us, then we must be on the point of selling. Or much rather, we must be on the point of being able to find some help, either from Thomas or from someone else, of the half-dealer, half-collector sort. Thus C.M., even without helping us in any other way, could buy another study from us. I don’t know if you’ve ever read Les frères Zemganno by the De Goncourts, who perhaps loosely retrace their own history. If you know it, you’ll know, more than I’d know how to express to you, that I fear that the effort of obtaining money for us will be too exhausting for you.  If I wasn’t dreadfully, and always, tormented by that anxiety, I would say things were going well, because the work will improve and my health is much better than in Paris.
   I realize more and more that work goes infinitely better when you feed yourself well, when you have your paint, when you have your studio, and all that. But is my heart set on my work going well? No, and a thousand times no. I’d like to succeed in making you clearly feel this truth, that in giving money to artists you yourself are doing an artist’s work, and that I’d wish only that my canvases might become of such a kind that you aren’t too unhappy with your work. And that’s not all; I’d also like you to feel that we earn from the money that we transfer, and that by so doing, we’ll achieve a more complete independence than that provided by the trade as such. And what we’ll do later to revive the trade could well be precisely that dealers live with artists, the one for what one may call the housekeeping side, to supply studio, food, 
   paint &c., the other to produce. Alas, we’re not at that stage with the old trade, which will always follow the old routine that benefits nobody among the living and does no good for the dead, either. But what of it; that may leave us more or less cold, not having a duty to change what exists or to battle against a wall. Anyway, we’d have to get our share of sunshine without vexing anyone. And I always figure to myself that you don’t have your whole share of sunshine, since your work in Paris with the Goupils is too exhausting. So when I think about that, I have a dealer’s rage; then I want to earn money so that you can be freer to go and do what you want. I feel that we’re on the point of selling or of finding help that will give us breathing space. There you are, perhaps I believe that what may still be far away is nearer than it in fact is, and then I feel this anxiety coming over me, of spending too much. 
   However, paintings come off better if one takes care of oneself and keeps well. But for you, for your work, for your whole life as well, you mustn’t have too many worries. How are those sciatic pains? Have they stopped? Whatever happens, you’d help me more by keeping well, by living well; even if the consignments of colours had to suffer as a result, than by being too much in straits on my account. I believe that the day will come when people will want the work — well — but perhaps that’s still far away, and meanwhile, don’t be too hard up. Because business, too, will come to you by itself and as if in a dream, better and more quickly if you take care of yourself than if you make yourself hard up. And look, at our age, surely we can finally have a certain calm, a certain wisdom about doing things. I fear now (and I avoid them) poverty, bad health and all that, and I hope you have the same sentiments. 
   So I almost have a feeling of remorse at having today bought this piece of furniture, although it’s good, because I had to ask you to send me money sooner than if it hadn’t been for that. Be sure of this. If you were ill or if you had too much pain and trouble, nothing would work any more. And if you are well, business will eventually come to you by itself, and ideas for doing some business will come to you infinitely more by eating well than by not eating enough. So shout at me to stop if I’m going too far. If not, it’s naturally much better, because for me too, I can of course work much better if I’m comfortable rather than too hard up. But don’t go believing that I’m more attached to my work than to our well-being, or at least to our peace of mind, above all. Once Gauguin’s here he’ll feel the same thing — and he’ll recover. 
   The day may well come for him when he’ll wish, and will be able, to become the family man again that he really is. I’m very, very curious to know what he has done in Brittany. Bernard writes many good things about it. But doing rich painting is so difficult to do in the cold and in poverty — and possible that in fact his real home will prove to be, when all’s said and done, the warmer and happier south.  If you saw the vineyards! There are bunches weighing a kilo, even — the grape is magnificent this year, from the fine autumn days coming at the end of a summer that left much to be desired. I regret having spent money on this chest of drawers, but it can save us buying a dearer one — the least would have been 35. And when Gauguin comes, he would in any case have to have something there to put his linen in, and anyway his bedroom will be more complete like this. 
   (I notice that this cupboard has panels just like those on which Monticelli painted.)6 Once we have a richer moment I’d take this one for myself and he’d take the one at 35 francs. At that price there’s always something second-hand, but not always at the price at which I bought this one. I’ve been thinking that if at your place there are now beginning to be certain studies that might be taking up too much room at your place and getting in your way, they could be taken off their stretching frames and sent here, where we have enough room to store them. I’m saying that about certain things from the past year, or, indeed, for everything that might be in your way. Paris will be very beautiful in the autumn, all the same. The town here is nothing at night, everything’s dark. I believe that an abundance of gaslight, which, after all, is yellow and orange, intensifies blue, because at night the sky here seems to me, and it’s very funny, darker than in Paris. And if I ever see Paris again, I’ll try to paint effects of gaslight on the boulevard. 
   Ah, it must be the opposite in Marseille; I imagine that it must be more beautiful than Paris, La Canebière. I so often think of Monticelli, and when I reflect on what they say about his death it seems to me that not only must we put aside the idea that he died a drinker in the sense of stupefied by drink, but we should also know that, even more than in the north, life is quite naturally spent in the open air and in cafés. My friend the postman, for example, lives a great deal in cafés and is certainly more or less a drinker and has been so all his life. But he’s so much the opposite of stupefied, and his elation is so natural, so intelligent, and then he argues with such a broad sweep, à la Garibaldi, that I’m quite prepared to reduce the legend of Monticelli the absinthe drinker to exactly the proportions of this case of my postman. My paper’s full, write to me as soon as is possible for you. Handshake and good luck. Ever yours, Vincent One day I’ll perhaps know the details about those last days of Monticelli’s. 
   One day Mrs de Larebey la Roquette10 said to me: Monticelli, now, Monticelli, but he was a man who should have been at the head of a big studio in the south. The other day, you remember, I wrote to our sister and to you that sometimes I believed I had the feeling that I was continuing Monticelli here. Good — but you see now — the studio in question, we’re setting it up. What Gauguin will do, what I’ll also do myself, will be in keeping with that 
 0  fine oeuvre by Monticelli, and we’ll try to prove to the good folk that Monticelli didn’t quite die, slumped over the tables of the cafés along La Canebière, but that the little old chap is still alive. And the thing won’t end with us either; we’re starting it off on quite a solid footing. My dear Theo, I had hardly dared hope so soon for your new 50-franc money order, for which I thank you very much. I have many expenses, and it sometimes distresses me greatly when I increasingly come to realize that painting is a craft that is probably practised by extremely poor people, since it costs a lot of money. But the autumn still continues to be so fine! What a funny part of the country, this homeland of Tartarin’s! Yes, I’m happy with my lot; it isn’t a superb and sublime country, it’s all something out of Daumier come to life. Have you re-read the Tartarins yet? Ah, don’t forget to! Do you remember in Tartarin the lament of the old Tarascon diligence — that wonderful page? Well, I’ve just painted that red and green carriage in the yard of the inn. You’ll see.  
   This hasty croquis gives you its composition. Simple foreground of grey sand. Background very simple too, pink and yellow walls with windows with green louvred shutters, corner of blue sky. The two carriages very colourful: green, red, wheels yellow, black, blue, orange. A no. 30 canvas once again. The carriages are painted in the style of Monticelli, with impastos. You once had a very beautiful Claude Monet, of 4 colourful boats on a beach. Well, here it’s carriages, but the composition is of the same kind. Now imagine a huge green-blue fir tree spreading its horizontal branches over a very green lawn and sand dappled with light and shade.  This very simple corner of a garden is enlivened by beds of orange lead geraniums in the background areas, under the black branches. Two figures of lovers stand in the shade of the big tree. No. 30 canvas.
   And then two more no. 30 canvases, the Trinquetaille bridge and another bridge; the railway goes over the road.  
   Lastly, the Trinquetaille bridge with all its steps is a canvas done on a grey morning, the stones, the asphalt, the cobblestones are grey, the sky a pale blue, the small figures colourful, a puny tree with yellow foliage. Two canvases, then, in grey, broken tones, and two highly coloured canvases. Forgive these very poor croquis. I’m knocked out from painting this Tarascon diligence, and I can see that I haven’t a head fit for drawing. I’m off to have supper, and I’ll write to you again this evening. But this decoration is coming along a bit, and I believe that it will broaden my way of seeing and doing things. It will be open to a thousand criticisms; very well, but never mind, as long as I manage to put some spirit into it. But yes, good old Tartarin’s country, I’m enjoying myself there more and more, and it will become like a new homeland for us. I don’t forget Holland, though; it’s precisely the contrasts that make me think of it a lot. I’ll get back to this letter shortly.  Now I’m getting back to this letter again. How I’d like to be able to show you the work that’s in progress! I’m really so tired that I can see that my writing isn’t up to much. I’ll write to you better another time, because it’s beginning to take shape now, this idea of the decoration. I wrote to Gauguin again the day before yesterday, to say once again that he would probably recover much more quickly here. And he’ll do such fine things here. He’ll need time to recover. I assure you that I believe that if ideas for work are coming to me more clearly and more abundantly at present, then eating good food has a lot to do with it. And that’s what everybody in painting should have. How many things that still have to change! Isn’t it true that all painters ought to live like manual workers? A carpenter, a blacksmith, normally produces infinitely more than they do. In painting too, there should be large studios where each person would work more steadily. 
   I’m really falling asleep standing up, and I can’t see any longer, my eyes are so tired. More soon, because I still had lots of things to say, and I should make you some better croquis. Probable that I’ll do it tomorrow. Thank you many times again for your money order. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent It’s 5 canvases that I’ve started on this week;8 that brings, I believe, to 15 the number of these no. 30 canvases for the decoration. 

2  
canvases of  
sunflowers9


3
,,
poet’s garden10


2
,,
other garden11


1
,,
Night café12


1
,,
Trinquetaille bridge13


1
,,
Railway bridge14


1
,,
the house15


1
,,
the Tarascon diligence16


1
,,
the starry night17


1
,,
the furrows18


1
,,
The vineyard.


 My dear Theo, Letter from Gauguin, who tells me that he’s sent you a consignment of paintings and studies. Would be very pleased if you could find the time to write and give me some details of what they are. His letter was accompanied by a letter from Bernard, to say that they’d received my consignment of canvases, that they’re going to keep all 7 of them. Bernard will make another study for me in exchange, and the three others, Moret, Laval and a young chap, will also send portraits, I hope. Gauguin has my portrait, and Bernard says that he’d like to have one like it, although he already has one of me, which I exchanged with him at the time for the portrait of his Grandmother. And it pleased me that they weren’t averse to what I had done in figure painting.
   I was, and still am, almost knocked out by last week’s work. I still can’t do anything, but in any case there’s a very violent mistral, which raises clouds of dust that turns the trees on boulevard des Lices7 white from top to bottom. So I’m pretty well forced to take it easy. I’ve just slept for 16 hours at a stretch, which has gone a long way to making me myself again. And tomorrow I’ll have got over this exhaustion. But I made a good week of it, eh, with 5 canvases;8 if it gets a bit of its own back this week, well, it’s natural. 
   If I’d worked more calmly, you can see clearly that the mistral would have caught me out again. Ah, if the weather’s fine here you have to take advantage of it, otherwise you’d never do anything. But tell me what Seurat’s doing. If you see him, tell him on my behalf that I have in progress a decoration which at present amounts to 15 square no. 30 canvases, and which, to make an ensemble, will take at least 15 more, and that in this work on a broader scale it’s often the memory of his personality and of the visit that we made to his studio to see his beautiful big canvases10 that gives me courage in this task. I’d very much like us to have Seurat’s portrait of himself.
   I had told Gauguin that the reason I had urged him to make an exchange of portraits was because I believed that he and Bernard would certainly have made several studies, each of the other. That as that wasn’t the case and he had done the portrait especially for me, I didn’t want it as an exchange, considering the thing too important. He writes to say that he really does wish me to take it as an exchange. His letter is again very complimentary, as I don’t deserve it, let’s pass over it. I’m sending you article on Provence which seemed well-written to me. These Félibres are a literary and artistic circle: Clovis Hugues, Mistral, others, who write quite good, even sometimes very good sonnets in Provençal and sometimes in French. If one day the Félibres stop being unaware of my existence, they’ll all visit the little house. I prefer that it not happen before I’ve finished my decoration. But loving Provence as whole-heartedly as they do, I perhaps have a right to their interest. If ever I insist on that right, it will be so that my work remains here or in Marseille, where, as you know, I’d like to work, believing that the Marseille artists would do well to continue what their Monticelli started. If Gauguin and I write an article in one of the papers here, that will be enough to make contact. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo — At last I’m sending you a little croquis to give you at least an idea of the direction the work is taking. Because today I’ve gone back to it. My eyes are still tired, but anyway I had a new idea in mind, and here’s the croquis of it. No. 30 canvas once again. This time it’s simply my bedroom, but the colour has to do the job here, and through its being simplified by giving a grander style to things, to be suggestive here of rest or of sleep in general. In short, looking at the painting should rest the mind, or rather, the imagination. The walls are of a pale violet. The floor — is of red tiles. The bedstead and the chairs are fresh butter yellow. The sheet and the pillows very bright lemon green. The blanket scarlet red. The window green. The dressing table orange, the basin blue. The doors lilac. And that’s all — nothing in this bedroom, with its shutters closed. The solidity of the furniture should also now express unshakeable repose. Portraits on the wall, and a mirror and a hand-towel and some clothes. The frame — as there’s no white in the painting — will be white. This to take my revenge for the enforced rest that I was obliged to take. I’ll work on it again all day tomorrow, but you can see how simple the idea is. The shadows and cast shadows are removed; it’s coloured in flat, plain tints like Japanese prints.  It will contrast, for example, with the Tarascon diligence2 and the night café.
   I won’t write to you at length, because I’m going to start very early tomorrow with the fresh morning light, to finish my canvas. How are your pains? Don’t forget to give me news about them. I hope you’ll write in the next few days. One day I’ll do you some croquis of the other rooms as well. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent 
    My dear Theo, What you say about two new friends1 certainly does give me great pleasure. But all the same it astonishes me that you tell me about them and their frame (costing, if I remember rightly, 2, francs), but that you don’t say a single word about what there was in that frame, nor a single word about what they’ve done in paintings. It’s perhaps that you believe that I might have heard of it, but I declare to you that I’m hearing about this business and even about themselves for the first time. So I’m not yet au courant, and would thus like to know: ‘all well and good about the frame, but what was in it, and what are they doing at present?’2 After that I’ll surely be in a better position to give myself an idea of what their conversations with you and Pissarro were like, once I’m au courant with what they themselves are doing. In any case, it proves one thing: it’s that Dutch artists spoke of you as being the dealer in Impressionist paintings, something we mustn’t lose sight of. 
   And what did they have to say about Dutch art, about Breitner, Rappard, about others, and lastly, what do they say about Tersteeg? Gauguin writes that he’s already sent his trunk and promises to come around the 20th of this month, in a few days, therefore. Which I’ll be very pleased about, because I dare believe that it will do us both good. So write me with details of your new friends’ painting soon, and if they’re really painters who are trying to make more progress in something that’s completely new, boldly recommend the south to them. I believe that a new colourist school will take root in the south, seeing increasingly that those from the north rely more on skill with the brush and the so-called picturesque effect than on the desire to express something through colour itself.
   It gave me great pleasure to have your news, but it astonishes me so much not to know what there was in that frame. Here, under the stronger sun, I have found what Pissarro said to be true, and moreover what Gauguin wrote me, the same thing. The simplicity, the bleaching-out, the solemnity of great effects of sunlight. In the north one will never suspect what it’s like. And if these artists of the monstrous frame seriously wish to see something new, let them go to Bing and then to the south. As for me, I already get palpitations over ordering my deal frames at 5 francs. It’s like what I said to Russell about his house, that the one here would cost several times less in hundred-franc notes than his would in thousands, and that nevertheless we were working for Gauguin even without R. Have they seen any Seurats, these gentlemen with the frame? I think I’d prefer Seurat’s frame5 to theirs, for inventiveness. 
   Yes, speaking of Seurat — have you seen him again yet? As far as selling goes, of course I think you’re right not to look for it deliberately, of course I myself would prefer never to sell if the thing could be done. But if we were nevertheless forced to it, after what has happened we no longer have an alternative, of course, if it should indeed become necessary one day, we could do no better than not be hasty. I shake your hand firmly, and I hope you’ll tell me what there actually was in the frame. And to our new friends, warm regards and good luck, which I wish them. If they want to see something new, certainly, let them go to the south or Africa or to Sicily if it’s winter. But it’s only — if they have originality — the real south that will show them something different from Holland. I hope you’ll write to me again before long. Good handshake Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’m adding another line to tell you that this afternoon I finished the canvas of the bedroom. In any case it gives me great pleasure that you’ve met these Dutchmen. It could just be the case that in fact I’d heard of this large painting after all, but not of the frame. Rappard once told me a story (praising the painting and the painter), and I’ll easily see if it was the same painting that was involved when you’ve told me about what they’re doing. In any event, my dear brother, look, if you complain of having nothing in your noddle as far as of being able to produce good things goes, just look, so much the more must I myself also feel the same melancholy. I could do nothing whatsoever without you, and there you are, let’s not get worked up over what the two of us produce together this way, but on the contrary, let’s smoke our pipes in peace without tormenting ourselves too much to the point of melancholy for not producing separately and with less pain. 
   Certainly, from time to time I’d like to be able to do a little business for a change, and by doing so earn some money on my own account. But since we can change nothing about it for the moment, let’s accept this inevitable fact, that you’ll always be condemned to trade, without rest or variation, and I that mine is also without rest, constant work that’s really tiring and absorbing for the mind. I hope that in a year you’ll feel that the two of us have created an artistic thing. This bedroom is something like that still life of French novels with yellow, pink, green covers, you’ll recall. But I believe that the execution is simpler and more virile. No stippling, no hatching, nothing; the tints flat, but in harmony. I don’t know what I’ll undertake afterwards, because my sight’s still tired. 
   And at those moments, just after hard work, and the harder it is, I feel my noddle empty too, you know. And if I wanted to let myself give in to that, nothing would be easier for me than to hate what I’ve just done and kick it, like père Cézanne. But after all, why kick it — let’s leave the studies alone, and only if we see nothing in them, fine, if we see in them what people call good, well then, so much the better. Anyway, let’s not think too deeply about good and bad, that always being very relative. It’s precisely a failing of the Dutch to call one thing absolutely good and another absolutely bad, when it’s nowhere near as inflexible as that. 
   You know, I’ve read Richepin’s Césarine too; there are good things in it — the march of the soldiers in flight, how you feel their weariness — let’s not march in life without also being soldiers sometimes. The quarrel of the son and the father is really heartbreaking, but it’s like the same Richepin’s ‘La glu’, I find that it leaves no hope, while Guy de Maupassant, who has written things that are certainly just as sad, makes things turn out more humanely in the end. Look at Monsieur Parent, look at Pierre et Jean, they don’t end in happiness but anyway, the people are resigned and go on all the same. It doesn’t end in so much blood and gore, does it now? I much prefer Guy de Maupassant to Richepin, for being more consoling. At present I’ve just read Balzac’s Eugénie Grandet. The story of a miserly peasant. More soon, I hope. Ever yours, Vincent True, if we’re not producing framed paintings like these Dutchmen, you and I, all the same we’re making paintings like Japanese prints, and let’s keep it to that, no more. (Have you read Madame Chrysanthème yet?)14 My dear Theo, Thank you for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. Thank you for having written me more about those Dutch artists’ painting. I’ve had gas put in, in the studio and the kitchen, which is costing me 25 francs for installation. If Gauguin and I work every evening for a fortnight, won’t we earn it all back again? But since, what’s more, G. may come any day now, I’ll absolutely absolutely need at least another 50 francs. I’m not ill, but I’d become so without any doubt if I didn’t take hearty food and if I didn’t stop painting for a few days. In fact, I’m once again nearly reduced to the state of madness of Hugo van der Goes in Emile Wauters’s painting.
   And if it wasn’t for the fact that I had something of a dual nature, something of both the monk and the painter, I should be — and that long since — utterly and entirely reduced to the above-mentioned state. But even for all that, I don’t believe that my madness would be of the persecution kind, since my feelings in a state of excitement have more to do with preoccupations about eternity and eternal life. But even so, I must be wary of my nerves, &c. I only say that because you’d be wrong to believe that I’d have had the slightest wariness about these two Dutch painters. But in truth, it’s only after your second letter that I can form an idea of what they’re doing, and I’m very curious to see the photographs of their drawings.
   I have a great urge to write you a letter just so that you can have them read it, to explain once again why I myself believe in the south for the future and the present. And at the same time to say how strongly I believe that we’re right to see in the Impressionist movement a tendency towards great things, and not only a school that would limit itself to making optical experiments. Similarly with those who do history painting, then, or at least have done it in the past; while there are some very bad history painters, like Delaroche and Delort, are there not also good ones, like E. Delacroix and Meissonier? Well then, since I have the firm intention not to paint for at least 3 days, perhaps I’ll rest by writing to you and to them at the same time. Because you know that that interests me a good deal, the influence that Impressionism will have on Dutch painters and on Dutch art lovers.  
   Here’s very rough croquis of my last canvas. A row of green cypresses against a pink sky with a pale lemon crescent moon. Foreground a piece of waste land, and some sand and a few thistles. Two lovers, the man pale blue with a yellow hat, the woman has a pink bodice and a black skirt. That makes the fourth canvas of the ‘poet’s garden’, which is the decoration for Gauguin’s bedroom. It horrifies me to have to ask you for money again, but I can do nothing about it, and what’s more, I’m worn out again. However, I’d believe that the work that I’m doing while spending a little more will one day seem to us less costly than my previous work. Besides, I’d already told you that if the thing had been possible, to do a deal with Thomas, I’d have had a strong desire to be able to put even 200 more into the work before Gauguin’s arrival. As that couldn’t be done, I nevertheless pressed ahead as far as I could with what I had on the go, in a strong desire to be able to show him something new. And not to fall under his influence (because of course he’ll have an influence on me, I hope) before being able to show him beyond any doubt my own originality. He’ll see that anyway from the decoration as it is now. Please, at least if the thing’s possible for you, send me another fifty francs right away; I don’t quite know how I’ll be able to get by otherwise. I’m pleased that you’ve read Tartarin again. Anyway. I hope you’ll be able to write to me no later than by return of post. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo I have another no. 30 canvas, autumn garden, two bottle-green and bottle-shaped cypresses, three little chestnut trees with tobacco-coloured and orange foliage. A small yew with pale lemon foliage, with purple trunk. Two small bushes with blood-red and scarlet purple foliage. A little sand, a little lawn, a little blue sky. There you are, and yet I’d sworn not to work!2 But it’s like that every day, sometimes in passing I find such beautiful things that in the end you have to try to do them anyway. Ah well, the money that you give me and which, besides, I’m asking from you more than ever, I’ll return it to you in work, and not only the present but the past as well. But let me work as long as it isn’t absolutely impossible. Because if I don’t take advantage of the opportunities, it would be even worse. Ah, my dear brother, if I could do such a thing, or if Gauguin and I together could do such things that Seurat would join us! 
   But in my opinion, at the very least we must reckon his large paintings of the models and the Grande Jatte3 but — let’s see — at 5, each, shall we say... Ah well, if we were to join together, Gauguin and I should each also be capable of a nominal contribution of 10 thousand. Once again that falls right in line with what I was telling you, that I wished absolutely absolutely to do 10 thousand francs worth of painting for the house. Well, it’s funny, although I don’t calculate in figures but in feelings, I so often happen upon the same results while starting from totally divergent standpoints. I daren’t dream about it, I daren’t say any more about this Seurat partnership. First I must try to get to know Gauguin better. With whom one can’t go wrong, no matter what. 
   And listen to this. As soon as you can, and even right away if the thing were possible, I need another 10 metres of canvas at 2. francs. Then large tubes like the silver white and zinc white. 

zinc white 
20 
of 
the 
largest 
tubes 


Silver  ,, 
10
,,
,,
,,
,,


Chrome 
Yellow I               
10
,,
,,
,,
,,


,,
      ,,      2 
5
,,
,,
,,
,,


Prussian Blue
5
 


Geranium Lake
10
medium tubes


Veronese Green
10
largest tubes


 Ah well, I must say nevertheless that it would absolutely astonish me if we weren’t able to overcome NO MATTER WHAT difficulties of production. But the present ones all the more so. If it went wrong we’d have to have deliberations as soon as Gauguin arrived, which I hope will be any day now. I believe it possible that things could get jolly lively at the ’89 exhibition.
   It might be better if they didn’t get lively, but after all, we’ll just have to take things as they come. By the way, have you ever read Les frères Zemganno, by the De Goncourts? If not, read it. If I hadn’t read it I would perhaps be more daring. And even after reading it, the ONLY fear that I have is of asking you for too much money. If myself I were to break myself down in the effort, it would mean absolutely nothing to me. I still have resources for that eventuality, because I would either go into the business or I would write, but as long as I’m in painting I see nothing but the association of several people, and the communal life. The leaves are starting to fall; the trees are visibly yellowing, the yellow increasing every day. It’s at least as beautiful as the orchards in blossom, and as for the work that we may do, I dare believe that indeed far from losing by it, we could gain by it. But anyway. In any case, would you please send me some more money (50 if possible, and otherwise less) by return of post and certainly no later. And if you didn’t have time to write, I’d ask you please to send it by money order, whether it’s more, or less, as you were able. I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo Thank you for your letter1 and for the 50-franc note. As you learned from my telegram, Gauguin arrived in good health. He even gave me the impression of being in better shape than me. He’s naturally very pleased with the sale that you made, and I no less, since that way certain other expenses absolutely necessary for moving in needn’t wait nor will fall on your shoulders alone. G. will certainly write to you today. He’s very, very interesting as a man, and I have every confidence that with him we’ll do a great many things. He’ll probably produce a great deal here, and perhaps I shall too, I hope. And then I dare believe that for you the burden will be a little less heavy, and I dare believe much less heavy. I myself feel, to the point of being mentally crushed and physically drained, the need to produce, precisely because in short I have no other means, none, none, of ever recouping our outlay. 
   I can do nothing about it if my paintings don’t sell. The day will come, though, when people will see that they’re worth more than the cost of the paint and my subsistence, very meagre in fact, that we put into them. I have no other wish nor other concern regarding money or finances than in the first place not to have debts. But my dear brother, my debt is so great that when I’ve paid it, which I think I’ll succeed in doing, the hardship of producing paintings will, however, have taken my entire life, and it will seem to me that I haven’t lived. The only thing is that perhaps the production of paintings will become a little more difficult for me, and as far as the number goes, there won’t always be as many. The fact that they don’t sell now makes me anxious that you’re suffering too, but it would be of little concern to me if you didn’t become too hard up by my bringing nothing in. 
   But in money matters it’s enough for me to feel this truth, that a man who lives for 50 years and spends two thousand a year spends a hundred thousand francs, and that he must bring a hundred thousand in, too. To make a thousand paintings at a hundred francs during one’s life as an artist is very, very, very hard, but when the painting is at a hundred francs and again our task is very heavy at times. But nothing about that can be altered. We’ll let Tasset down completely, probably, because to a large extent at least, we’ll use less expensive colours, both Gauguin and I. As for canvas, we’ll also prepare it ourselves. For a time I had the slight feeling that I was going to be ill, but Gauguin’s arrival has so taken my mind off it that I’m sure it will pass. I mustn’t neglect my diet for a while, and that’s all. And absolutely all. And after a time you’ll have some work. Gauguin has brought a magnificent canvas that he exchanged with Bernard, Breton women in a green meadow. White, black, green and a red note, 
   and the matt tones of the flesh. Anyway, let’s all be of good heart. I believe that the day will come when I’ll sell too, but I’m so far behind with you, and while I spend I bring nothing in. That feeling sometimes makes me sad. I’m very, very happy at what you write, that one of the Dutchmen5 will come and live with you, and that that way you won’t be alone any more, either. It’s perfectly, perfectly good, especially as we’ll soon have winter. Anyway, I’m in a hurry, and have to go out to get back to work on another no. thirty canvas. Soon, when Gauguin writes to you, I’ll add another letter to his. Of course, I don’t know in advance what Gauguin will say about this part of the world and about our life, but in any case he’s very happy with the good sale that you made for him. More soon, and I shake your hand firmly. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thank you for your money order for 50 francs, which I’ve just received. I did know that Gauguin had travelled, but I didn’t know he was a real seaman; he’s been through all the difficulties, he was a real topman on the topmast and a real sailor. That gives me a tremendous respect for him, and an even more absolute confidence in his personality. He has — if he’s to be compared with something — links with those Icelandic fishermen of Loti’s. I believe that it’ll make the same impression on you as on me. Now we’ve done some work already, of course; he has a negress on the go, and a big landscape of this region. What he tells me about Brittany is very interesting, and Pont-Aven is a quite amazing part of the world. Of course, everything there is better, bigger, more beautiful than here. Of a more solemn character, and above all more of a whole and more defined than the small, stunted, scorched countryside of Provence. Be that as it may, he, like me, nevertheless likes what he sees, and is particularly intrigued by the Arlésiennes. 
   This week I did a new study of a sower; the landscape utterly flat, the figure small and blurred. Then I did another study of ploughed field with the stump of an old yew. Like this.  And that’s all. How are you, and did you do anything in Brussels? I’m still very glad to know that you’re no longer alone in the apartment. My brain feels tired and dry again, but I’m better this week than the previous fortnight. What Gauguin has to say about the tropics 
   seems wonderful to me. There, certainly, is the future of a great renaissance of painting. Just ask your new Dutch friends8 if they’ve ever thought how interesting it would be if a few Dutch painters were to found a colourist school in Java. If they heard Gauguin describe the hot countries they’d certainly feel like doing that straightaway. Not everyone is free and in a position to be able to emigrate. But what things there would be to do! I regret not being ten or twenty years younger; I’d certainly go. Now not very likely that I’ll move from the coast, and the little yellow house here in Arles will remain what it is, a halfway house between Africa and the tropics and the people of the north. It’s now quite likely that Bernard will go to Africa, where he’ll be with Milliet, who greets you warmly and will leave on the 1st November.
   In the evening especially, with the gaslight, I like the look of the studio very much. If you ever find any more Daumiers, don’t forget to get your hands on them. And I believe that in the evening we’ll bring neighbours and friends here, and that in the evening we’ll work as in the daytime, chatting as we do so. Portraits of people lit by gaslight — that always seems to me a thing to do. I shake your hand firmly, and write to us soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, As for ill, I already told you I didn’t think I was, but I would have become so if my expenses had had to continue. Since I was in a state of terrible anxiety about making you make an effort beyond your strength. On the one hand, I felt that I couldn’t do better than push to complete what we started, to urge Gauguin to join us, and on the other hand, as you may know from experience, when you furnish a house or move in, it’s the case that it’s more difficult than you think. Now I dare breathe at last, as we’ve all had a stroke of darned good fortune with the sale you were able to make for Gauguin. One way or another, all three of us, he, you and I, will still be able to pull ourselves together a bit, in order to calmly take in what we’ve just done. Have no fear that I may have money worries. Now that Gauguin has come, the goal has been achieved for the time being. By combining our expenses, he and I, the two of us won’t even spend what living here was costing me just on my own. 
   He’ll even be able to put some money aside, the more he sells. Which, in a year, let’s say, he can use to settle in Martinique, and which he couldn’t put aside otherwise. You’ll have my work, and a painting by him in addition, every month. And I’ll do the same work without having so much trouble, and without running up so many expenses. But in the past it seemed to me that the partnership that we’ve just entered into was a good policy. The house is going very, very well and is becoming not only comfortable but also an artists’ house. So have no fears for me, nor for yourself, either. I had, in fact, a terrible feeling of anxiety for you, because if Gauguin hadn’t had the same ideas, I would have caused you some rather heavy expenses for nothing. But Gauguin is astonishing as a man; he doesn’t get worked up, and he’ll wait here, very calmly, while at the same time working hard, 
   for the right moment to take a huge step forward. He needed rest as much as I did. With the money that he’s just earned, he would have been able to pay for rest in Brittany, too, of course, but as things are now, he’s sure to be able to wait without falling into the inevitable debt again. We won’t spend more than 250 a month between the two of us. And will spend much less on paint, since we’re going to make it ourselves. So have no worries about us on your part, and catch your breath, too, which you’ll darned well need. For my part, I’d wish just to ask you too that I’m asking for no more than to continue at a very ordinary sum per month of 150 (and the same for Gauguin). Which in any case reduces my personal spending. While his paintings will certainly go up. 
   Later, then, if you keep my paintings for yourself, either in Paris or here, I’ll be much happier to be able to say bluntly that you prefer to keep my work for us than to sell it, than to have to get involved in the struggle for money at this moment. Most certainly. Besides, if what I do is good, then we’ll lose nothing by it, in terms of money, because, like wine that you would have in the cellar, it would quietly ferment. On the other hand, it’s only fair that I give myself a little trouble to make a painting such that even from the point of view of the money, it was preferable that it should be on my canvas rather than in the tubes. Now in closing I dare hope that in 6 months’ time Gauguin, you and I, we’ll see that we’ve founded a little studio that will last and that will continue to be an essential stopping-off point or station, useful at least to all those who’ll wish to see the south. I shake your hand very firmly. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I don’t yet know what Gauguin thinks about my decoration in general; I only know that there are some studies that he really does like, namely, the Sower, the Sunflowers, the Bedroom. And the whole thing, I don’t know anything about it myself yet, because I need more canvases of the other seasons. Gauguin has already just about found his Arlésienne, and I could wish that I too had got as far. 
   But for my part, I find the landscape here very easily, and quite varied. So at last my little work potters along. I dare believe that you’ll like the new Sower. I’m writing in haste, we have heaps of work. He and I plan to go to the brothels a lot, but only to study them. My dear Theo, Gauguin and I thank you very much for sending 100 francs, and also for your letter. Gauguin is very happy that you like his consignment from Brittany, and that others who’ve seen it have liked it too. At the moment he’s working on some women in a vineyard, entirely from memory, but if he doesn’t spoil it or leave it there unfinished it will be very fine and very strange. Also a painting of the same night café that I too have painted. I’ve done two canvases of a leaf-fall, which Gauguin liked I think, and am now working on a vineyard, all purple and yellow. Then I have an Arlésienne at last, a figure (no. 30 canvas) knocked off in one hour, background pale lemon — the face grey — the clothing dark dark dark, just unmixed Prussian blue. She’s leaning on a green table and is sitting in a wooden armchair — coloured orange. Gauguin has bought a chest of drawers for the house, various household utensils and 20 metres of very strong canvas, a whole lot of things we needed, which it was more convenient to have anyway. Only we’ve made a note of all that he paid, which comes to nearly 100 francs, which we’d pay him back at New Year, or in the month of March for example, and then the chest of drawers &c. would belong to us of course. I consider this quite right in fact, since he intends to put some money aside when he sells.
  Up to the moment (let’s say in a year) when he’ll have enough to risk a second trip to Martinique. We’re working a great deal, and our life together is going very well. I’m very happy to know that you’re not alone in the apartment. De Haan’s drawings are very fine, I like them a lot. Now doing that with colour, arriving at the same degree of expression without resorting to black and white chiaroscuro, my goodness, that’s not easy. And he’ll even arrive at another type of drawing if he carries out his plan of passing through Impressionism like a school, regarding his new attempts at colour absolutely as studies. But as I see it he’s right several times over to do all that. Only there are several people who call themselves Impressionists who don’t have his knowledge of the figure, and it’s precisely that, that knowledge of the figure, that will later come back up to the surface and that he’ll always benefit from. I very much want to get to know them one day, De Haan and Isaäcson. If ever they came here, Gauguin would certainly say to them: go to Java and do some Impressionism. Because Gauguin, while he works hard here, always has a nostalgic longing 
   for hot countries. And there you are, it’s undeniable that if one came to Java, for example, with the preoccupation to work there with colour, one would see a heap, a whole heap, of new things. Then in those brighter countries under the stronger sun, the shaded parts as well as the shadow cast by objects and figures become completely different, and the coloration is so intense that one’s tempted quite simply to suppress it. That’s already happening here. Anyway, I won’t press the point about the importance of the question of tropical painting, De Haan and Isaäcson, I’m already sure, will sense its importance. In any case, to come here at some time or another would do them no harm, they’ll certainly find interesting things. Gauguin and I are going to dine at home today, and we feel sure and certain that we will manage this as often as it seems preferable or cheaper to us. So as not to delay this letter I’ll finish it for today. I hope to write to you again soon. Your arrangement for the money is absolutely fine. I think that you’d like the leaf-fall that I’ve done. It’s lilac poplar trunks cut by the frame where the leaves begin. These tree-trunks, like pillars, line an avenue where old Roman tombs coloured lilac-blue are lined up to right and left. Now the ground is covered as if by a carpet with a thick layer of orange and yellow leaves 
   — fallen. Some are still falling, like snowflakes. And in the avenue dark figurines of lovers. The top of the painting is a very green meadow and no sky, or almost none. The second canvas is the same avenue but with an old fellow and a fat woman, round as a ball. But if only you’d been with us on Sunday! We saw a red vineyard, completely red like red wine. In the distance it became yellow, and then a green sky with a sun, fields violet and sparkling yellow here and there after the rain in which the setting sun was reflected. We shake your hand firmly in thought, and more soon, I’ll write to you again as soon as I can, and also to our Dutchmen. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve received a letter from Mr E. Dujardin regarding the exhibition of some canvases of mine in his dark hole. I find it so disgusting to pay for the planned exhibition with a canvas that in reality there aren’t two answers to this gentleman’s letter. There’s one, and you’ll find it enclosed. Only I’m sending it to you and not to him so that you know my thoughts and so that you can simply tell him that I’ve changed my mind and haven’t the slightest desire to exhibit at this moment. It’s no use at all getting angry with the chap, it’s better to be tritely polite. So no exhibition at the Revue Indépendante, I make so bold as to believe that Gauguin is of the same opinion. In any case he doesn’t at all urge me to do it. We’ve hardly ever exhibited, have we? There were a few canvases at Tanguy’s place first of all, at Thomas’s and then at Martin’s. Now I declare here that I absolutely do not know what useful purpose that even serves, and it would seem to me more just, certainly, that you should simply keep the studies that you liked in your apartment, that you send the others back to me here rolled up, since the apartment is small and if you kept everything they’d clutter it up. So, without our hurrying I’m preparing the wherewithal here to stage a more serious exhibition. But as for the Revue Indépendante I’d ask you to put a complete end to it, the opportunity is too good, and you’ll feel that they’re completely mistaken if they imagine I’m going to pay to have myself put on show in such a small, dark and above all scheming hole. Now with regard to the few canvases at Tanguy’s or Thomas’s place... that’s a matter of such absolute indifference to me that in reality it isn’t worth talking about — but you should know above all that I’m really not at all attached to the idea.
   I know in advance what I’ll do the moment I have enough canvases. For the moment I’m simply busying myself with making them. What will please you is that Gauguin has finished his canvas of the women picking grapes, it’s as fine as the negresses and if, say, you paid the same price for it as for the negresses (400 I think)5 that would certainly be good too. But naturally you have to choose from all of them, and I haven’t seen the Breton things. He’s explained several of them to me, and they must be fine. I’ve done a rough sketch of a brothel, and I’m in fact planning to do a brothel painting. Gauguin came here on 20 Oct., so we must reckon that he received 50 francs from you last month. Yes, I think that for the exhibition of my work we must express ourselves clearly. As for you, you’re with the Goupils, you aren’t authorized to do business outside the firm. So since I’m absent I do not exhibit. I repeat, I’m indifferent as regards Tanguy’s place, provided Tanguy is fully aware that he has no right over my canvases, none. So, my position is clear at least, which isn’t a matter of absolute indifference to me. With a little more work I’ll have sufficient not to need to exhibit at all any more, that’s what I’m aiming at.
   I myself have also finished a canvas of a vineyard, all purple and yellow with little blue and violet figures and a yellow sun. I think you’ll be able to place this canvas next to Monticelli’s landscapes. I’m going to set myself to work often from memory, and the canvases done from memory are always less awkward and have a more artistic look than the studies from nature, especially when I’m working in mistral conditions. I don’t think I’ve yet told you that Milliet has left for Africa. He has a study of mine for troubling to take the canvases to Paris10 and Gauguin gave him a little drawing in exchange for an illustrated edition of Madame Chrysanthème. I’ve still not received the exchanges from Pont-Aven, but Gauguin assures me that the canvases were done. The weather’s windy and rainy here, and I’m very happy not to be alone, I work from memory on bad days, and that wouldn’t work if I were alone. Gauguin has also almost finished his night café. He makes a really interesting friend — I must tell you that he knows how to cook perfectly, I think that I’ll learn that from him, it’s really convenient. We’re very satisfied with making frames with simple strips of wood nailed on the stretching frame and painted, which I’ve started doing.  Do you know that Gauguin is partly the inventor of the white frame? But the frame made from four strips of wood nailed on the stretching frame costs 5 sous, 
   and we’re certainly going to perfect it. It serves very well, since this frame doesn’t stick out at all and is one with the canvas. More soon, I shake your hand firmly and send my regards to the Dutchmen. Ever yours, Vincent Gauguin sends his warm regards, and asks you to keep back from the price of the first painting you sell the amount necessary for the stretching frames, which he wants with keys, and also what Bernard will ask from you for a commission he gave him. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for sending me 100 francs and for your letter. You’ll be pleased to hear that I’ve had a letter from Jet Mauve thanking us for the painting. A very nice letter, in which she talks of times gone by. I’ll reply to it and will send another few croquis in the letter. You’ll also be pleased to know that we have an addition to the collection of artists’ portraits. Laval’s self-portrait, extremely good.  
   Also a seascape by Bernard in exchange for canvases of mine. The portrait of Laval is very self-assured, very distinguished, and will be precisely one of the paintings you speak of, which one takes before the others have recognized the talent.  I think it excellent that you’re taking a Luce. Does he by any chance have his portrait? That’s in case there’s nothing extraordinarily interesting — portraits are always good. Gauguin’s working on a very original nude woman in some hay with some pigs. It promises to be very beautiful, with great style. He’s had a magnificent pot with 2 rats’ heads sent back from Paris. He’s a really great artist and a really excellent friend. If you could ever get a fine Bernard I strongly urge you to do so. Gauguin has a superb one.
   I’ve been working on two canvases. A reminiscence of our garden at Etten with cabbages, cypresses, dahlias and figures. Then a Woman reading a novel in a library like the Lecture Française. A completely green woman. Gauguin gives me courage to imagine, and the things of the imagination do indeed take on a more mysterious character. The consignment from Tasset arrived the day before yesterday, and we were very pleased with it. Could Tasset also send, but it’s needed urgently: 

1
very large tube of Vermilion


  (same size as the large flake whites)


3
tubes, the same size, of Prussian Blue.


 We’d be infinitely obliged. I’m pleased that Jet Mauve has written, and I dare to believe that little by little they’ll come round to the Impressionists after all. A handshake in thought, and my regards to De Haan and Isaäcson. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Gauguin’s canvas, Breton Children, has arrived, and he’s altered it very, very well. But although I quite like this canvas, it’s all the better that it should be sold, since the two he’s going to send you from here are thirty times better. I’m speaking of the women picking grapes and the woman with the pigs. The reason for this is that G. is beginning to overcome his liver or stomach trouble that has bothered him lately. Now I’m writing to you in reply to what you were telling me, that you would frame a small canvas of a pink peach tree I think, to place it with those gentlemen. I don’t want to leave any doubt about what I think of that.  First, if you yourself would like to place either a bad or good thing of mine there, my word if that will make you happier, then of course you have and will have carte blanche either now or later. But if, on the other hand, it’s either for my pleasure or for my own benefit, I’d be of the opinion that it’s completely unnecessary. If you were to ask me what would give me pleasure, it’s quite simply one single thing, that you keep for yourself what you like from what I do, in the apartment, and that you don’t sell any of it now. The rest, the stuff that gets in the way, send it to me here for this good reason, that everything I’ve done from nature is chestnuts pulled out of the fire. 
   Gauguin, in spite of himself and in spite of me, has proved to me a little that it was time for me to vary things a bit – I’m beginning to compose from memory, and all my studies will still be useful to me for that work, as they remind me of former things I’ve seen. So what does selling any of it matter if we’re not absolutely pressed for money? For in addition, I’m sure even now that you’ll eventually see things that way. As for you, you’re with the Goupils, but I certainly am not, after however working there for 6 years4 we were absolutely dissatisfied on both sides with everything, them with me, me with them. It’s an old story, but all the same that’s how it is. So continue on your way, but as far as the business is concerned it seems to me incompatible with my previous behaviour to come back there with a canvas of such innocence as this little peach tree or some other thing like it. No. If in a year or two I have enough to make an exhibition of my own, let’s say thirty or so no. thirty canvases — 
   And if I said to them, will you do it for me, Boussod would certainly send me packing. Knowing them alas a little too well, I think that I won’t approach them. Not that I’d ever try to ruin anything, on the contrary, you must admit that I urge on all the others there zealously. But as for me, my word I have an old grudge against them. Be sure and certain that I consider you, as a seller of Impressionist paintings, to be very independent of the Goupils, that it will therefore always be a pleasure for me to urge artists to go there. But I don’t want Boussod ever to have a chance to say ‘this little canvas isn’t too bad for this young beginner’, as if never before... On the contrary, I won’t come back to them, I’d prefer never to sell than to enter into it other than very straightforwardly. Now they’re not people to act straightforwardly, so it isn’t worth beginning again. 
   Be assured that the more clear-cut we are about this the more they’ll come to you to see them. You don’t sell them, so in showing my work you aren’t trading outside the firm of Boussod, V. & Cie. Thus you’re acting honestly, and that’s worthy of respect. If one or the other wants to buy however, fine, all they have to do is approach me directly. But be sure of this: if we can withstand the siege my day will come. I cannot and must not at this moment do anything other than work. One thing however perhaps, I’m going to reply to Jet Mauve, tell her a whole heap of things about Gauguin &c. &c., send her some croquis, and indirectly Tersteeg will prick up his ears again. Gauguin and I often talk about the need to hold exhibitions in London, and perhaps we’ll send you a letter for Tersteeg to read. The thing is, should Tersteeg have an energetic successor — that day is approaching — the latter won’t be able to work with anything but new paintings. Handshake — we’ll need some more colours.   I must also tell you that the month with the two of us together is going better on 150 each than I did on 250 just for myself. At the end of a year you’ll notice that this is working after all. I can’t say anything more yet. I rather regret having the room full of canvases and having nothing to send when Gauguin sends his. The thing is, regarding the impasto things, Gauguin has told me how to get rid of the grease by washing them from time to time. What’s more, when that’s done I must work on them again to retouch them. If I sent you any of them now, their colour would be duller than it will be later. They all think that what I’ve sent was done too hastily. I wouldn’t deny it, and I’ll make certain changes. It does me enormous good to have company as intelligent as Gauguin and to see him work. You’ll see that certain people are going to reproach G. for no longer doing Impressionism. 
   His two latest canvases which you’re going to see are very firm in the impasto, there’s even some work with the knife in them. And that will put his Breton canvases into the shade a little, not all, but some of them. I hardly have the time to write, otherwise I’d already have written to those Dutchmen. I’ve had a letter from Boch, you know that Belgian who has a sister in the Vingtistes. He’s enjoying working up there. I really hope that we’ll always remain friends with Gauguin, and in business with him, and if he succeeds in setting up a tropical studio that would be magnificent. But that will take more money by my calculations than by his. Guillaumin has written to Gauguin, he seems very hard up but must have done some fine work. He has a child now, but he was terrified by the confinement and says he’ll always have ‘the red vision’ of it before his eyes. Only Gauguin has replied to him very well, saying that he, G., had seen it 6 times.
   Jet Mauve is in much better health, and as you perhaps know has been living in The Hague since last August, near the Jewish cemetery, so almost in the country. You won’t lose anything by waiting a little while for my work, and we’ll calmly leave our dear pals to scorn the present ones. Fortunately for me I know what I want better than they believe and am, basically, extremely indifferent to the criticism of working hurriedly. In reply I’ve produced work these last few days even more hurriedly. Gauguin was telling me the other day — that he’d seen a painting by Claude Monet of sunflowers in a large Japanese vase, very fine. But — he likes mine better. I’m not of that opinion — only don’t think that I’m weakening. I regret as always, as you know, the scarcity of models, the thousand obstacles to overcome that difficulty. If I were a completely different man and if I were wealthier I could force it, at present I’m not giving up and am plodding on quietly. If at the age of forty I do a painting of figures like the flowers Gauguin was talking about 
   I’ll have a position as an artist alongside anything. So, perseverance. In the meantime I can tell you anyway that the last two studies are rather funny. No. 30 canvases, a wooden and straw chair all yellow on red tiles against a wall (daytime). Then Gauguin’s armchair, red and green, night effect, on the seat two novels and a candle. On sailcloth in thick impasto. What I say about sending back studies, there’s no hurry at all, and I’m referring to the bad ones which, however, will serve me as documents — or those that are cluttering up your apartment. As to what I say in general about the studies, I’m set on just one thing: that the position is quite clear. Don’t trade on my behalf outside the firm; as for me, either I’ll never return to the Goupils, which is more than likely, or I’ll return straightforwardly, which is quite impossible. One more handshake, and thanks for everything you’re doing for me. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your kind letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. Am very happy that Gauguin’s success as regards selling continues. If in a year’s time he could have made enough to carry out his plan of going and setting himself up in Martinique, I’d think that his fortune would be made. Only, to my mind he shouldn’t risk going back there before he has 5 thousand put aside, according to him he would need 2,. But then to my mind he wouldn’t leave alone but with one other or several others, and would found a lasting studio there. Anyhow, a lot more water will flow under the bridge before then. What you write about the Dutchmen interests me greatly. I hope one day to get to know both of them personally. How old are they? I dare to believe that in the final reckoning they’ll feel their coming to France was a good thing. The trouble they’re having with colour — my goodness — that doesn’t surprise me. May De Haan never lose touch with the serious study of Rembrandt, to which the two drawings of his that I’m currently looking at testify!3
   Have they read Silvestre’s book on E. Delacroix, and the article on colour in C. Blanc’s Grammaire des arts du dessin? So ask them that on my behalf, and if they haven’t read it they should. As for me, I think more about Rembrandt than may appear from my studies.  Here’s a croquis of the latest canvas I’m working on, another sower. Immense lemon yellow disc for the sun. Green-yellow sky with pink clouds. The field is violet, the sower and the tree Prussian Blue. No. 30 canvas.
   Let’s calmly wait to exhibit until I have around thirty no. 30 canvases. Then we’ll exhibit them once in your apartment for the friends, and not exerting any pressure even then. And let’s not do anything else. There are lots of reasons for not stirring now. Besides, it won’t take long, I think I’ll be able to send it to you at the time of the exhibition or a little later. In the meantime it will dry thoroughly here, and I can go over all the canvases again once they’re thoroughly dry, even the impasted areas. If at the age of forty I do a painting of figures or portraits the way I feel it, I think that will be worth more than a more or less serious success now. Have you seen the studies that Bernard brought back from Brittany? Gauguin has told me many things about them. He himself has one which is simply masterly. I think that buying one from him, from Bernard, would be doing him a service, and that he really deserves it. Only we mustn’t forget that either at New Year or in March, Gauguin will have to be repaid the money he may have laid out, for example for sheets or things that would remain in the studio. For on both sides I think we’ll find it best to change nothing, absolutely nothing, in the financial arrangement we’ve established. If at the end of a year we continue to find it satisfactory, time will tell.
   Gauguin’s working on a very beautiful painting of washerwomen, and also a big still life of an orange pumpkin and some apples and white linen on a yellow background and foreground. The weather here is cold, but we see some really beautiful things all the same. Such as yesterday evening, a sickly lemon yellow sunset, mysterious, of extraordinary beauty — Prussian blue cypresses, trees with dead leaves in every broken tone against that, not half bad. You couldn’t imagine how pleased I am that you have painters with you and aren’t staying alone in the apartment, just as I too am very pleased to have such good company as Gauguin’s. More soon, and thanks once again for your kind letter. Ever yours, Vincent What do De Haan and Isaäcson say about Monticelli? Have they seen any of his paintings other than the ones at your place? You know that I still lay claim to continuing the job that Monticelli began here. My dear Theo, On my side, too, it’s more than time that I wrote to you with a rested mind for once. Thanks first of all for your kind letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. Our days pass in working, working always, in the evening we’re worn out and go to the café before retiring to bed early. That’s our existence. Naturally it’s winter here too, although the weather still continues to be very fine from time to time. But I don’t find it disagreeable to try to work from the imagination, since that permits me not to go out. Working in the heat of a stove doesn’t bother me, but the cold isn’t for me, as you know. Only I’ve spoiled that thing I did of the garden at Nuenen1 and I feel that habit is also necessary for works of the imagination. But I’ve done the portraits of an entire family, the family of the postman whose head I did before – the man, his wife, the baby, the young boy and the 16-year-old son, all characters and very French, although they have a Russian look. No. 15 canvases. You can sense how in my element that makes me feel, and that it consoles me to a certain extent for not being a doctor.
   I hope to persevere with this and be able to obtain more serious sittings, which can be paid for with portraits. And if I manage to do this entire family even better, I’ll have done at least one thing to my taste and personal. At the moment I’m really in the shit, studies, studies, studies, and that’ll go on for some time yet – such a mess that it breaks my heart – and yet that’ll give me neatness when I’m 40. From time to time a canvas that makes a painting, such as that sower, which I too think is better than the first one. If we can withstand the siege, a day of victory will come for us, even though we wouldn’t be among the people who are being talked about. It’s rather a case of thinking of that proverb, joy in town, grief at home. What can you expect? Supposing that we still have a whole battle to fight, then we must try to mature calmly. You’ve always told me to do more quality than quantity. Now, nothing is preventing us from having a lot of studies classed as such, and consequently not having a whole heap of things for sale. And if sooner or later we’re obliged to sell, 
   then selling at a slightly higher price the things that can hold their own from the point of view of serious research. I think that – in spite of myself – I won’t be able to prevent myself sending you a few canvases shortly, say within a month. I say in spite of myself, for I’m convinced that the canvases gain from drying right through here in the south, to the point where the impasto is thoroughly hardened, which takes a long time – that’s to say a year. If I restrain myself from sending them that would certainly be best. For we don’t need to show them at the moment, I’m well enough aware of that. Gauguin works a lot – I very much like a still life with yellow background and foreground. He’s working on a portrait of me which I don’t count as one of his undertakings that don’t come to anything. At present he’s doing landscapes, and finally he has a good canvas of washerwomen, even very good as I see it. You should receive two of Gauguin’s drawings in return for 50 francs which you sent him in Brittany. But old mother Bernard simply appropriated them. Speaking of indescribable stories, this is indeed one. I think that she’ll give them back though in the end. 
   Beware of the Bernard family, but you should know that in my opinion Bernard’s work is very fine and that he’ll have some well-deserved success in Paris. Very interesting that you met Chatrian. Is he blond or dark? I’d like to know that, since I know the two portraits. In their work, it’s above all Madame Therèse and L’ami Fritz that I like.  As regards L’histoire d’un sous-maître, it seems to me that there’s more to find fault with than seemed possible to me at the time. I think we’ll end up spending our evenings drawing and writing, there’s more to work on than we can do. You know that Gauguin has been invited to exhibit at the Vingtistes. His imagination is already leading him to think of settling in Brussels, which would indeed be a means of finding himself in a position to see his Danish wife again. Since he has some success with the Arlésiennes in the meantime, I wouldn’t consider that as being absolutely without consequences. He’s married and doesn’t much appear to be, in short I fear there may be an absolute incompatibility of character between his wife and himself, but naturally he’s more attached to his children, who judging from the portraits are very beautiful. We, on the other hand, aren’t too gifted in that respect. More soon, a handshake for you and for the Dutchmen. Vincent Gauguin will write to you tomorrow, he’s waiting for a reply to his letter16 and sends his warm regards. My dear Theo Thank you very much for your letter, for the 100-franc note enclosed with it, and also the 50-franc money order. I myself think that Gauguin had become a little disheartened by the good town of Arles, by the little yellow house where we work, and above all by me. Indeed, there are bound to be grave difficulties still to overcome here, for him as well as for me. But these difficulties are rather within ourselves than elsewhere. All in all, I think personally that he’ll either definitely go or he’ll definitely stay. I told him to think and do his sums again before acting. Gauguin is very strong, very creative, but precisely because of that he must have peace. 
   Will he find it elsewhere if he doesn’t find it here? I’m waiting with absolute serenity for him to make a decision. Good handshake. Vincent My dear Theo, Yesterday Gauguin and I went to Montpellier to see the museum there, and especially the Bruyas room1 — there are many portraits of Bruyas, by Delacroix, by Ricard, by Courbet, by Cabanel, by Couture, by Verdier, by Tassaert, by others too. After that there are paintings by Delacroix, Courbet, Giotto, Paul Potter, Botticelli, T. Rousseau, very fine. Bruyas was a benefactor to artists, and this is all I’ll say to you: in the Delacroix portrait, he’s a gentleman with a beard, red hair, who looks damnably like you or me, and who made me think of that poem by Musset... everywhere I touched the earth, an unfortunate man dressed in black came to sit beside us, a man who looked at us like a brother. It would have the same effect on you, I’m sure. I’d really ask you to go and see, at that bookshop where they sell lithographs of ancient and modern artists, if you could manage to get the lithograph after Delacroix’s ‘Tasso in the madhouse’18 without great expense, since it would seem to me that this figure (by Delacroix) must have some relationship to this fine Bruyas portrait. 
   They have other Delacroixs there, a study of a mulatto woman (which Gauguin once copied), the Odalisques, Daniel in the lions’ den. By Courbet, first, The village girls, magnificent, a nude woman seen from the back, another on the ground, in a landscape. Second, The woman spinning23 (superb), and a whole load more Courbets. Anyway, you must know that this collection exists, or else know people who have seen it, and consequently be able to talk about it. So I shan’t insist on the museum (except for the Barye drawings and bronzes!)24 Gauguin and I talk a lot about Delacroix, Rembrandt &c. The discussion is excessively electric. We sometimes emerge from it with tired minds, like an electric battery after it’s run down. We’ve been right in the midst of magic, for as Fromentin says so well, Rembrandt is above all a magician25 and Delacroix a man of God, of God’s thunder and bugger off in the name of God.  I’m writing this to you with reference to our friends, the Dutchmen De Haan and Isaäcson, who have so sought and loved Rembrandt, in order to encourage you to pursue the researches.
   One mustn’t get discouraged about that. You know the strange and superb portrait of a man by Rembrandt at the La Caze gallery, I told Gauguin that, for me, I saw in it a certain family or racial resemblance to Delacroix, or to him, Gauguin. I don’t know why, but I always call that portrait ‘the traveller’ or ‘the man coming from far away’. That’s an equivalent and parallel idea to what I’ve already told you, always to look at the portrait of old Six. The fine portrait with the glove for your future, and the Rembrandt etching, Six reading by a window in a ray of sunlight, for your past and your present. That’s the stage we’re at. Gauguin said to me this morning, when I asked him how he felt: ‘that he could feel his old self coming back’, which gave me great pleasure. As for me, coming here last winter, tired and almost fainting mentally, I too suffered a little inside before I was able 
   to begin to remake myself. How I’d like you to see that museum in Montpellier some day, there are some really beautiful things there! Say so to Degas, that Gauguin and I have been to see the portrait of Bruyas by Delacroix at Montpellier, for we must boldly believe that what is, is, and the portrait of Bruyas by Delacroix resembles you and me like a new brother. As regards setting up a life with painters as pals, you see such odd things and I’ll end with what you always say, time will tell. You can tell all this to our friends Isaäcson and De Haan, and even boldly read them this letter, I would already have written to them if I’d felt the necessary electric force. On behalf of Gauguin as well as myself, a good, hearty handshake to you all. Ever yours, Vincent If you think that Gauguin or I have a facility in our work, the work isn’t always accommodating. And for the Dutchmen not to get discouraged in their difficulties any more than we do, that’s what I wish for them, and for you too. My dear brother I hope that Gauguin will also completely reassure you a little regarding painting matters. I expect to start work again soon. The charwoman and my friend Roulin had taken care of the house, put everything in good order. When I come out I’ll be able to continue on my way here again, and soon the fine days will come and I’ll start on the orchards in blossom again. I am, my dear brother, so heartbroken by your journey, I would have wished that you’d been spared that, for all in all no harm has come to me, and it wasn’t worth 
   troubling you. I can’t tell you how much it delights me that you’ve made peace and even more than that with the Bongers. Say so on my behalf to André, and give him a very cordial handshake from me. What wouldn’t I have given for you to see Arles in fine weather, now you have seen it when it’s dark. However, be of good heart, send the letters directly to me, 2, place Lamartine. I’ll send Gauguin the paintings of his that are still at the house as soon as he wishes. We owe him the money he spent on the furniture. Handshake, I must go back to the hospital again, but shortly I’ll leave for good. Ever yours, Vincent Also write a line to Mother on my behalf, so that no one will be worried. My dear Theo, Perhaps I won’t write you a really long letter today, but anyhow a line to let you know that I returned home today. How I regret that you were troubled for such a little thing, forgive me, for I am after all probably the primary cause of it. I hadn’t foreseen that it would lead to you being told about it. Enough. Mr Rey came to see the painting with two of his doctor friends, and they at least understand darned quickly what complementaries are. Now I’m planning to do Mr Rey’s portrait and possibly other portraits as soon as I’ve accustomed myself a little to painting once again. Thank you for your last letter, I do indeed always feel your presence, but on your side you should also know that I’m working on the same thing as yourself. 
   Ah, how I wish that you’d seen the portrait of Bruyas by Delacroix and the whole museum at Montpellier where Gauguin took me. How people have already worked in the south before us! In truth, it’s quite difficult for me to believe that we’ve gone so far astray as that. As to it being a hot country — my word, I can’t help but think of a certain country Voltaire speaks of — and without even counting the simple castles in the air. Those are the thoughts that come to me as I return home. I’m very eager to know how the Bongers are, and if relations with them continue to be good, which I hope they do. If you think it all right — now that Gauguin has left — we’ll go back to 150 francs a month. 
   I think I’ll see calmer days here again than in the course of the past year. What I’ll need very much for my instruction are all the reproductions of Delacroix’s paintings that one can still get in that shop where they sell lithographs of ancient and modern artists &c. for 1 franc, I think. I definitely don’t want the most expensive ones. How are our Dutch friends De Haan and Isaäcson? Give them my warm regards. I just think that we must still keep calm regarding my own painting. If you want some I can certainly send them to you now, but when calm returns to me I hope to do something else. In any case, as regards the Independents, do what seems best to you and what the others will do. 
   But you’ve no idea how much I regret that your journey to Holland hasn’t already been made. Ah well, we can’t change any of the facts, but make up for it as far as possible by correspondence or however you can, and tell the Bongers how much I regret having, perhaps unwittingly, caused a delay. I’ll write to Mother and Wil one of these days, I must also write to Jet Mauve. Write to me soon, and be completely reassured as to my health, it will cure me completely to know that things are going well for you. What is Gauguin doing? As his family are in the north, and as he’s been invited to exhibit in Belgium and has some success in Paris at the moment, I like to think that he’s found his way. Good handshake, I’m quite happy all the same that this is a thing of the past. Another vigorous handshake. Ever yours, Vincent 
    My dear brother,  I hope that it won’t amaze you too much that although I wrote to you this morning I’m adding a few words this same evening. For I’ve been unable to write for several days, but you can clearly see that that’s over now. I’ve written a line to Mother and to Wil, which I addressed to our sister with the sole aim of reassuring them, should you have happened to mention to them that I had been ill. For your part, simply tell them that I’ve been a bit ill like the time when I had the clap in The Hague, and that I got myself treated at the hospital. But that it’s not worth the trouble of mentioning, since I got off with a fright and that I was only in the aforesaid or mentioned hospital for a few days. Thus you’ll doubtless find yourself in agreement with the short note that I’ve made them swallow down there at home in Holland. 
   And by so doing it will be pretty difficult for them to get worked up about it. In fact, they’ll imagine that I almost had the clap. I hope that you’ll find this stratagem innocent enough. Also you’ll see from this that I haven’t yet forgotten how to jest sometimes. I’m going to get back to work tomorrow, I’ll begin by doing one or two still lifes to get back into the way of painting. Roulin has been excellent to us, and I dare believe that he’ll remain a staunch friend whom I’ll still need quite often, for he knows the country well. We dined together today. If ever you want to make the house physician Rey very happy, this is what would give him great pleasure:
   he has heard about a painting by Rembrandt, The anatomy lesson. I told him that we’d get an engraving of it for his study. I hope to do his portrait as soon as I feel a little stronger. Last Sunday I met another doctor who, in theory at least, knows what Delacroix and Puvis de Chavannes are all about, and who’s very curious to know about Impressionism. I dare hope to get to know him better. I think that this engraving of The anatomy lesson is published by François Buffa and Sons, and that the net price should be between 12 and 15 francs. It would be best to frame it here to avoid transportation costs. I can assure you that a few days in the hospital were very interesting, and that one perhaps learns how to live from the sick. I hope that I’ve just had a simple artist’s bout of craziness and then a lot of fever following a very considerable loss of blood, as an artery was severed.
   But my appetite came back immediately, my digestion is good, and the blood is recovering day by day, and likewise serenity is returning to my mind day by day. So please deliberately forget your sad journey and my illness. Painting is the profession you know, and my goodness we’re perhaps not wrong to try to keep our hearts human. You can see that I’m doing what you asked me to, that I’m writing what I feel and what I think. For your part, follow up this meeting with the Bongers calmly, I hope that it will continue as a solid friendship, and that perhaps it’s even more. If I remain here it’s because I might not be able to transplant myself for the moment. After a little while we can review the pros and cons of the situation and do the calculations again. I shake your hand firmly.  Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Even before receiving (this very moment) your kind letter, I received a letter from your fiancée this morning announcing the engagement. So I’ve already replied to her with my sincere congratulations, as I repeat them here to you. My fear that my indisposition might prevent your very necessary journey, which I’ve hoped for so much and for so long — now that this fear has disappeared I feel completely normal. This morning I went to the hospital again to have my wound dressed, and walked for an hour and a half with the house physician, and we talked a little about everything, even natural history. What you tell me about Gauguin gives me enormous pleasure, that’s to say that he hasn’t abandoned his plan to return to the tropics. That’s the right path for him. I think I can see clearly into his plan, and I approve of it with all my heart. Naturally I have regrets about it, but you can understand that provided it goes well for him that’s all I need.
   If you can do so, talk a little to C.M. about the future of his business and the fact that his son can continue it, provided C.M. himself does his full duty as regards listening to you and putting you and his son together. All the same C.M. must wish that the firm he founded continues — hasn’t he introduced into Holland the very artists who were not with the Goupils, &c. &c.? Then Tersteeg must admit the Impressionists, or at least believe in E. Delacroix, and then Tersteeg and you joining hands would be a great force that Boussod would have to reckon with. What is the 89 exhibition going to be? Don’t forget The anatomy lesson for Mr Rey. He had already told me before this morning that he likes painting, although he knows little about it, and that he would like to learn. I told him that he should become an art lover
   but that he shouldn’t try to do painting himself. This means that perhaps we’ll find 2 doctor friends here, Rey and the Parisian doctor I spoke to you about before. I told them that Bruyas of Montpellier8 shares a certain family characteristic with the two of us, and that we’re therefore simply continuing what Monticelli and Bruyas began in the south. When I came out of the hospital I had quite a few things to pay, and while they aren’t at all urgent for a few days, I’d be pleased if you could send me about fifty francs within the next few days. The mistake in pal Gauguin’s calculations was, in my opinion, that he’s a little too accustomed to closing his eyes to the inevitable expenses of house rental, charwoman and a whole heap of earthly things of that kind. Now, all these things weigh a little heavily on the shoulders of the two of us. But once we bear them, other artists could lodge with me without having those costs. 
   I’ve just been told that in my absence the owner of my house here apparently made a contract with a fellow who has a tobacco shop, to turn me out and give him, the tobacconist, the house. That worries me a little, for I’m not much inclined to have myself turned out of this house almost shamefully when it was I who had it repainted inside and out and had gas put in &c., in short who made habitable a house that had been locked up and uninhabited for quite a long time, and which I took on in very poor condition. This is to warn you that perhaps at Easter, for example, if the owner persists, I’ll ask you for advice about it, and that in all of this I consider myself merely an agent, defending the interests of our artist friends. Besides, it’s more than likely that water will flow under the bridge between now and then. And the main thing is not to worry about it. Has Bernard returned the Silvestre book to you yet? I’ll need the exact title to get  those doctors to read this book. Physically I am well, the wound is closing very well and the great loss of blood is balancing out, since I’m eating and digesting well. The most fearsome thing is the insomnia, and the doctor didn’t talk to me about it, nor have I spoken to him about it yet. But I’m fighting it myself.
   I’m fighting this insomnia with a very, very strong dose of camphor in my pillow and my mattress, and I recommend it to you if you ever have trouble sleeping. I was very fearful of sleeping alone in the house, and I felt anxious that I wouldn’t be able to sleep, but it went very well and I dare to believe that it won’t recur. My suffering in that way in the hospital was appalling, and yet in the midst of it all, though I was more than insensible, I can tell you as a curiosity that I kept thinking about Degas. Gauguin and I had talked about Degas before, and I pointed out to Gauguin that Degas had said this:... ‘I’m saving myself for the Arlésiennes.’ Now, you who know how subtle Degas is, once you’re back in Paris, tell Degas that I admit to you that up until now I’ve been powerless to paint them as other than poisonous, the women of Arles, and that he mustn’t believe Gauguin if Gauguin says good things too soon 
   about my work, which has only been done under the influence of illness. Now, if I recover I must start again, and I can’t again attain those peaks to which sickness imperfectly led me. I would very much have liked to give another painting to Rivet14 precisely because I wholly agree with you that it would be good to put Mr Rey in touch with Rivet. But you could indeed tell Rivet that it would be good to send Mr Rey back here to the hospital with the doctor’s qualification he’s going to try and get. He’s very, very useful here, and we’ll darned well be in need of doctors again here in Arles in days to come, as long as cholera and the plague &c. continue to menace the area around Marseille. Now Rey was born here and would be worthless in Paris or elsewhere, while once he was armed with the full medical power of Paris, 
   he could perform real miracles here in a time of calamity. Of course we have no right to get involved in the question of medicine, only Rivet himself will perhaps be of the same opinion as regards the feeling that an Arlesian isn’t a Parisian and vice versa. Did you pass through Breda, I’m naturally inclined to think so. Above all, reassure Mother about me. Have you seen the portrait of me that Gauguin has, and have you seen the portrait that Gauguin did of himself during those final days? If you were to compare this portrait which Gauguin did of himself then with the one I still have of him, which he sent to me from Brittany in exchange for mine, you would see that all in all he grew more serene here, personally. 
   What have De Haan and Isaäcson been doing? I had vaguely hoped to see them here one day had Gauguin himself stayed longer with me, and with a view to that I’d even rented two little rooms which were coming vacant in the house which I currently have the whole of (the rent is 21. francs a month). I daren’t press the point any more, seeing as Gauguin has gone, especially when one considers that the journey to the south costs quite a lot. Anyway, give them my kind regards when you see them again. Roulin sends his warm regards, he was very pleased with what you said about him in your letter today, and besides, he amply deserves it. Handshake, and naturally you’ll feel how much I wish you good days with your fiancée. Ever yours, Vincent. Warm regards to André Bonger if he’s there too. My dear Theo, Thanks for your kind letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. As to answering all your questions, can you do it yourself, at the moment I don’t feel up to it. On reflection I do indeed want to seek a solution, but I must re-read your letter again &c. But before discussing what I might or might not spend in a whole year, it would perhaps put us on track to review nothing but the present, current month for a moment.  In any case it has been completely lamentable, and indeed I would count myself fortunate if finally you might pay some serious attention to the way things are and have been for so long. But what can one do, unfortunately it’s complicated in several ways, my paintings are worthless, they cost me an extraordinary amount, it’s true, perhaps sometimes even in blood and brain. I won’t press the point, and what do you want me to say about it. Let’s get back in any case to the present month and speak only of money. On 23 December there was still a louis and 3 sous in the cash-box. That same day I received the 100-franc note from you. Here are the expenses 

Given to Roulin to pay the charwoman3
      for the month of December               20 Francs.
      same for 1st fortnight of January              10      ,,
Fr 

       30


      ,-


Paid
to hospital
 
21
 


,, 
to the nurses who dressed the wound
 
10
 


On returning here paid for a table, a gas heater &c., which had been lent to me and which I then took on account
 
20
 


Paid for having all the bedding, bloodstained linen &c. laundered        
 
12
,


Various purchases like a dozen brushes, a hat &c. &c. let’s say
 
10
 


______


103.

 Thus we’ve already arrived, on the day I left hospital or the day after, at an involuntary expenditure on my part of 103., to which it must be added that then on the first day 
   I cheerfully went to have dinner with Roulin at the restaurant, completely reassured and with no fear of renewed anguish. In short, the result of all that was that I was broke around the 8th. But one or two days after that I borrowed 5 francs. We were barely at the tenth. I was hoping for a letter from you around the tenth, but as that letter only arrived today, 17 January, the interval has been a fast of the most rigorous sort, all the more painfully so because my recovery couldn’t take place under those conditions. Nevertheless, I’ve started work again and I already have 3 studies done in the studio5 plus the portrait of Mr Rey, which I gave him as a keepsake. So this time again there’s no more serious harm than a little more suffering and relative anguish. And I retain all good hope. But I feel weak and a little anxious and fearful. Which will pass, I hope, as I regain my strength. Rey told me that being very impressionable was enough to have had what I had as regards the crisis, and that currently I was only anaemic, but that really I ought to feed myself up. But myself, I took the liberty of telling Mr Rey that if currently the first thing for me was to recover my strength, if by pure chance or misunderstanding it had just happened again that I’d had to keep to a rigorous one-week fast, if in similar circumstances he had seen many madmen quite calm and capable of working – and if not then would he deign to remember occasionally that for the moment I myself am not yet mad. Now, in these payments that I made, is there anything unwarranted, extravagant or exaggerated in these expenses, considering that the whole house was turned upside down by this adventure, and all the linen and my clothes soiled? If I paid what was owing to people almost as poor as myself as soon as I got back, is there an error on my part or could I have economized 
   more? Now today, the 17th, I receive 50 francs at last. Out of this I first pay the 5 francs borrowed from the café owner, then for 10 refreshments taken during this last week on credit,  

which makes
fr.
7.


I still have to pay for the linen brought back from the  hospital, and then for this past week, for the repair of shoes and of a  pair of trousers, certainly all in all something like 
 
5


Wood and coal still to be paid for December, and to be bought again, not less than
 
4


Charwoman 2nd fortnight of January
 
10


_____


26.


 Tomorrow morning when I’ve cleared this amount I’ll have left, net Fr. 23. It’s the 17th today, there are still 13 days left to get through. Question: how much can I spend per day? Next there must be added the fact that you sent 30 francs to Roulin, out of which he paid the 21. for the rent for December. There you are, my dear brother, the account for the current month. It isn’t finished. We now come to the expenses occasioned by a telegram from Gauguin which I’ve already reproached him quite formally for having sent. Are the expenses thus wrongly incurred less than 200 francs? Does Gauguin himself claim to have acted brilliantly in this? Look, I won’t press the point any more about the absurdity of that course of action. Let’s suppose that I was as distraught as could be, why then wasn’t the illustrious pal calmer I shan’t labour this point any more. 
   I can’t praise you enough for paying Gauguin in such a way that he couldn’t but congratulate himself on the relations he’s had with us. Unfortunately, that’s another expense, perhaps more sizeable than it should have been, but anyway, I glimpse hope in it. Mustn’t he, or at least shouldn’t he begin to see a little that we weren’t his exploiters, but that on the contrary we were anxious to safeguard his existence, his possibility of work and and... his integrity.  If that’s unworthy of the grandiose prospectuses for artists’ associations (which he proposed and to which he still holds) in the way you know, if that’s unworthy of his other castles in the air. Why then not consider him as not responsible for the sorrows and damage which unconsciously he could have caused us in his blindness, you as much as me. If currently that thesis still seems too bold to you – I won’t press the point – but let’s wait and see. He’s had previous experience with what he calls ‘banking in Paris’ and believes that he’s clever at it... Perhaps you and I are decidedly not so very curious in that regard. All the same, this isn’t in complete disagreement with certain passages of our earlier correspondence. 
   If Gauguin were to examine himself properly in Paris or have himself examined by a specialist doctor, my word I don’t really know what the result of it would be. Several times over I’ve seen him do things that you or I wouldn’t permit ourselves to do, having consciences that feel things differently – I’ve heard two or three things said of him in the same vein – but I, who saw him at very, very close quarters, I believed him led by his imagination, by pride perhaps but – – quite irresponsible. This conclusion doesn’t imply that I firmly recommend that you listen to him in all circumstances. But in the matter of settling his account I see that you acted with a higher conscience, and so I believe that we have nothing to fear from being led into errors of ‘banking in Paris’ by him. But as for him... upon my word, let him do what he wants, let him have his independences????? (in what way does he consider his character independent), his opinions... and let him go his own way, as it seems to him that he knows it better than we do. I find it quite odd that he’s claiming a painting of sunflowers from me, offering me in exchange I suppose, or as a gift, a few studies that he left here. I’ll send back his studies — which will probably have uses for him that they certainly wouldn’t have for me. 
   But for the moment I’m keeping my canvases here, and I’m categorically keeping those sunflowers of mine. He already has two of them, let that be enough for him. And if he’s unhappy with the exchange he made with me he can take back his little canvas of Martinique and his portrait that he sent me from Brittany, giving me back for his part both my portrait and my two canvases of sunflowers which he took in Paris. So if he ever raises this subject again, what I’ve said is clear enough. How can Gauguin claim to have feared disturbing me by his presence when he would have difficulty denying that he knew I asked for him continually, and people told him time and again that I was insisting on seeing him that very moment? Precisely to tell him to keep it between himself and me without disturbing you. He wouldn’t listen. It wearies me to recapitulate all this and calculate and recalculate things of this kind. I’ve tried in this letter to show you the difference that exists between my net expenses which come directly from me and those for which I am less responsible. I was sorry that just at that moment you should have those expenses, which were of no benefit to anyone. What will happen next, I’ll see if my position is tenable as I regain my strength. I so dread a change or moving house precisely because of new expenses. For quite a long time I’ve never been able to catch my breath completely.    I’m not giving up work, because at moments it’s going well, and I believe that it’s precisely with patience that I’ll arrive at this result of being able to recover the previous expenses with paintings I’ve done. Roulin’s going to leave, and as early as the 21st, he’s going to be employed in Marseille. The increase in salary is minimal, and he’ll have to leave his wife and his children for a while, who won’t be able to follow him until much later because the expenses of a whole family would be heavier in Marseille. It’s a promotion for him, but it’s a very, very meagre consolation the government gives in this way to such an employee after so many years of work. And at heart I think they, he and his wife, are still very, very upset. Roulin has very often kept me company during this past week. I completely agree with you that we mustn’t meddle in doctors’ issues that have absolutely nothing to do with us. Just because you wrote a note to Mr Rey saying you would introduce him in Paris, I thought you meant to Rivet. I didn’t think I was doing anything compromising by saying to Mr Rey myself that if he went to Paris it would give me great pleasure if he wanted to take a painting from me to Mr Rivet as a keepsake.
   Naturally I didn’t speak of anything else, but what I said is that I would always regret not being a doctor, and that those who believe painting is beautiful would do well to see in it only a study of nature. All the same, it will continue to be a pity that Gauguin and I were perhaps too quick to drop the question of Rembrandt and light which we embarked upon. Are De Haan and Isaäcson still there, they mustn’t get discouraged. After my illness I’ve naturally had a very sensitive eye. I have re-looked at De Haan’s undertaker, of which he was kind enough to send me a photograph. Well, it seems to me that there’s some real Rembrandt spirit in that figure, which seems lit by the reflection of a light emanating from the open tomb before which the said undertaker stands like a sleep-walker. It’s there in a very subtle way. I don’t tackle the question with charcoal and he, De Haan, has taken as a means of expression this very charcoal, which is again a colourless material. I would really like De Haan to see a study of mine of a lighted candle and two novels (one yellow, the other pink) placed on an empty armchair (Gauguin’s armchair, to be precise), no. 30 canvas in red and green. I’ve just been working on the pendant again today, my own empty chair, a deal chair with a pipe and a tobacco pouch. In these two studies, as in others, I myself sought an effect of light with bright colour – De Haan would probably understand what I’m seeking if you read him what I write to you on this subject. 
   However long this letter may now be, in which I’ve tried to analyze the month and in which I complain a little about the strange phenomenon of Gauguin preferring not to speak to me again while at the same time making himself scarce, it remains for me to add a few words of appreciation. What’s good about him is that he knows how to apportion expenditure from day to day marvellously well. Whereas myself, I’m often absent-minded, preoccupied with reaching a good end-point. He has more of a sense for balancing money for each day than I do. But his weakness is that by a sudden attack and animal-like impulse he upsets everything he was setting up. Now, does one remain at one’s post once one has taken it, or does one desert it? I don’t judge anyone in this, hoping not to be condemned myself should I lack the strength. But if Gauguin has so much real virtue and such capacities for doing good, how is he going to employ himself? As for me, I’ve ceased to be able to follow his actions, and I halt silently but with a question mark. 
 0  From time to time he and I have exchanged ideas on French art, on Impressionism... It now seems to me impossible, at least quite improbable, that Impressionism will organize itself and calm down. Why will the same not happen as happened in England at the time of the Pre-Raphaelites? The association is dissolved. Perhaps I take all these things too much to heart, and I’m perhaps too sad about them. Has Gauguin ever read Tartarin sur les Alpes, and does he remember Tartarin’s illustrious pal from Tarascon who had such an imagination that in one fell swoop he imagined an entire imaginary Switzerland? Does he remember the knot in a rope rediscovered high up in the Alps after the fall? And you, who wish to know how things happened, have you ever read  1  the whole of Tartarin? 
 That would teach you to recognize Gauguin pretty well. I urge you in all seriousness to look at that passage in Daudet’s book again. During your trip here were you able to notice the study that I painted of Tarascon’s diligence, which as you know is mentioned in Tartarin the lion-hunter? And then do you remember Bompard in Numa Roumestan and his happy imagination? This is what we have here, though of another kind, Gauguin has a fine and frank and absolutely complete imagination of the south, with that imagination he’s going to work in the north! My word, we may yet see some more funny things! And now dissecting the situation in all boldness, nothing prevents us from seeing him as the little Bonaparte tiger of Impressionism as regards... I don’t know quite how to say this, his vanishing let’s say from Arles is comparable or parallel to the Return from Egypt of the little corporal mentioned above, who also went to Paris afterwards. And who always left the armies in the lurch.
 2  Happily Gauguin, I and other painters aren’t yet armed with machine guns and other very harmful engines of war. I, for one, am quite determined to try to remain armed only with my brush and my pen. With loud shouts Gauguin nevertheless demanded from me in his last letter ‘His fencing masks and gloves’ hidden in the little room of my little yellow house. I’ll make haste to send him these childish things by parcel post. Hoping that he’ll never use more serious things. He’s physically stronger than we are, so his passions must also be much stronger than ours. Then he’s the father of children, then he has his wife and his children in Denmark, and at the same time he wants to go right to the other end of the globe to Martinique. It’s horrifying, all the vice versa of incompatible desires and needs which that must cause him. I had dared to assure him that if he’d stayed quietly with us, working here in Arles without wasting money, earning it, since you were busying yourself with his paintings, his wife would certainly have written to him and would have approved of his quiet life. There’s still more besides, there’s the fact that he was sick and seriously ill, and that it was a question of discovering both the illness and the remedy. Now here his pains had already ceased. Enough for today. Do you have the address of Laval, Gauguin’s friend? You can tell Laval that I’m very astonished that his friend Gauguin didn’t take a portrait of me which I intended for him, in order to give it to him. I’ll now send it to you and you can let him have it. I have another new one for you too. Thanks again for your letter. Please try and think that it would be really impossible to live for 13 days on the 23. francs that I’ll have left. I’ll try to manage with 20 francs which you’d send me next week. Handshake, I’ll read your letter again and will write to you soon about the other matters. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I must write you another line today. Yesterday they also presented the gas bill for ten francs (or 9.), which I also paid. That, added to the accounts I did for you in my previous letter, reduces to very, very little what I have left of the 50-franc note to feed myself. If you can, send me a bit more, I’ve explained everything about it clearly enough, I hope. I’m still very weak, and I’ll have difficulty in regaining my strength if the cold continues. Rey will give me some quinine wine, which I dare believe will have some effect.
   I would have a lot more things to say to you in response to your letter, but I have a painting on the easel2 and am in a hurry. You hadn’t told me yet, before now, that André Bonger was married. It can’t be very jolly when he complains about the high cost of running a home. Jo Bonger wrote me a line in response to the fact that I had congratulated her, that’s very kind of her. It has always seemed to me that you owed it to your social position and to the one you have in the family to marry, and it has been Mother’s wish for years. And by doing thus what you must do, you’ll perhaps have more tranquillity than before, even amidst a thousand-and-one difficulties. However, life isn’t easy for me either. 
   What wouldn’t I have given to be able to spend a day here with you and to show you the work in progress and the house, &c. &c. Now I would prefer that you hadn’t yet seen anything of what I have here than to leave with an impression of it in such distressing conditions. Ah well. What is Guillaumin doing? You know he has a son now. Bernard is being pestered more and more by his father, it’s becoming even more of a hell in that house. And the worst is that there isn’t much one can do about it, as soon as you put your hand in there you put it into a real wasps’ nest. They’re now going to try, Gauguin and Bernard, to exempt Bernard from military service because of narrowness (?) of the chest. Good — but it would be a thousand times 
   better for him if he did his service straightforwardly in Algeria with Milliet. I’m becoming ridiculous as regards Milliet, because the latter constantly asks me for news about it. Roulin is on the point of leaving. His salary here was 135 francs a month, to raise 3 children with that and live on it, himself and his wife! You can imagine what that was like. And that isn’t all, the pay rise is a remedy worse than the ill itself... What a civil service. And in what times we live. I’ve rarely seen a man of Roulin’s stamp, there’s an enormous amount of Socrates in him, ugly as a satyr as Michelet said... until on the last day a god was to be seen there, by whom the Parthenon was illuminated, &c. &c. If Chatrian, whom you met, had seen that man... Write to me at once at once. Please, because what you sent was really not entirely sufficient, as I’ve tried to explain to you with absolute clarity. Ever yours, Vincent. 
   I forget to say that yesterday I had a letter from Gauguin, still about the fencing masks and gloves. Full of varying and varied plans. And already he sees the end of his money on the horizon. Naturally... He already fears not being able to go to Brussels for that reason. And after that, if he can’t even go to Brussels, how will he go to Denmark10 and to the tropics? The best thing he could still do and the very one which he won’t do. That would be quite simply to return here. Anyway, we haven’t got to that yet, for he doesn’t yet tell me that he glimpses penury on the horizon, only it’s more than readable between the lines. He’s still at the Schuffeneckers’ temporarily, and is going to do portraits of the entire family. So he still has time to think things over.
   I haven’t replied to him yet. What is fortunately certain is that I dare believe that at heart Gauguin and I like each other enough as characters to be able to start over again together if necessary. It gives me great pleasure that you haven’t forgotten The anatomy lesson for Mr Rey. Later I myself will always have need of a doctor from time to time, and precisely because he knows me well now would be one more reason for me to remain quietly here. I’ll write to you again soon, but as for the monthly money, draw your own conclusions; I won’t spend more net than any other month. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. Naturally I’m now covered until the arrival of your letter after the 1st. What happened as regards that money was absolutely sheer chance and a misunderstanding for which neither you nor I are responsible. To telegraph, as you rightly say, I couldn’t do by the same sheer chance, for I didn’t know if you were still in Amsterdam or back in Paris. It is, with the rest, over now, and one more proof of the proverb that misfortunes never come singly. Yesterday Roulin left (naturally my dispatch of yesterday was sent before the arrival of your letter this morning). It was touching to see him with his children on the last day, above all with the very little one when he made her laugh and bounce on his knees and sang for her. His voice had a strangely pure, moved timbre which to my ear contained a sweet, distressed wet-nurse’s song and something like a distant echo of the clarion of revolutionary France. 
   He wasn’t sad, though, on the contrary, he had put on his brand-new uniform, which he’d received the same day, and everyone was making much of him. I’ve just finished a new canvas which has an almost chic little look to it, a willow basket with lemons and oranges — a cypress branch and a pair of blue gloves, you’ve already seen some of these fruit-baskets of mine. Listen — what you know I’m trying to do, myself, is to recoup the money that my training as a painter has cost, neither more nor less. That’s my right, along with earning my bread each day. It would appear just to me that it should come back, I don’t say into your hands, since we’ve done what we’ve done together, and we find it so upsetting to talk of money. But may it go into the hands of your wife, who anyway will join with us to work with the artists. If I’m not yet busying myself with selling directly it’s because my tally of paintings isn’t yet complete, but it’s coming along and I’ve set to work again with this iron resolve. I have good and bad luck in my production, but not bad luck alone. If, for example, our Monticelli bouquet3 is worth 500 francs to an art lover, and it’s worth that, then I dare assure you that my sunflowers4
   are also worth 500 francs to one of those Scots or Americans. Now, to be sufficiently heated up to melt those golds and those flower tones, not just anybody can do that, it takes an individual’s whole and entire energy and attention. When I saw my canvases again after my illness, what seemed to me the best was the bedroom. It seems to me that your apartment would be cluttered if I were to send all of this to you in Paris, especially after your wife will be staying there too. Then it would get the canvases known that would have lost their bloom and be talked about downstairs6 as if they were nothing, before the time and the hour. The sum we’re working with is certainly quite respectable, but a lot of it runs away and we must above all be watchful to ensure that not everything slips through the net from year to year. It’s also the fact that even if the month goes on I’m always trying to strike more or less a balance through production, at least relative. So many annoyances certainly make me a little anxious and fearful, but I’m not yet in despair. The trouble I foresee is that much prudence will be required to prevent the expenses we have when selling from exceeding the sale itself when the day comes. As regards that, how many times have we been in a position to see that sad thing in the lives of artists. I have the portrait of Roulin’s wife on the go that I was working on before being ill. In it I had ranged the reds from pink to orange, which rose into the yellows as far as lemon with light and dark greens. If I could finish that, it would give me great pleasure but I fear she won’t want to pose any more, with her husband away. 
   You’re right in seeing that Gauguin’s departure is terrible, right because it pushes us back down when we had created and furnished the house to take in friends in bad times. Only we’ll keep the furniture &c. all the same. And although today everyone will be afraid of me, that may disappear with time.  We’re all mortal and subject to all possible illnesses, what can we do about it when the latter aren’t precisely of a pleasant kind. The best thing is to try to recover from them. I find remorse, too, in thinking of the trouble that I’ve occasioned on my side, however involuntarily it may be — to Gauguin. But prior to the last days I could see only one thing, that he was working with his heart divided between the desire to go to Paris to carry out his plans, and life in Arles. What will the outcome of all that be for him? You’ll feel that although you have a good salary we still lack capital, except in goods, and that we need to be even more powerful to really change the sad position of the artists we know. But then one often just comes up against distrust on their part, and the fact that they’re always plotting among themselves, which always arrives at the result of — emptiness. I think that at Pont-Aven 5 or 6 of them had already formed a new group, perhaps broken up already. They aren’t dishonest, but that’s a thing without name and one of their defects as ‘enfants terribles’. 
   Now the main thing will be that your marriage isn’t delayed. By marrying you’re putting Mother’s mind at rest and making her happy, and anyway what your position in life and business rather necessitates. Will that be appreciated by the society to which you belong? Perhaps no more than the artists suspect that from time to time I’ve worked and suffered for the community... So from me, your brother, you won’t wish for the absolutely banal congratulations and the assurances that you’ll be transported straight to paradise. And with your wife you’ll cease to be alone, which I’d so wish for our sister Wil too. I still hope that perhaps, if we can’t make her meet and marry a doctor, we might at least perhaps be able to make her meet a painter. That, after your own marriage, would be what I would wish for now more than all the rest. Once your marriage is done, there will perhaps be others in the family, and in any case, you’ll see your path clear and the house will no longer be empty. 
   Whatever I think on a few other points, our father and our mother have been exemplary as married people. And I’ll never forget Mother on the occasion of our father’s death, when she said only one small word, which for me made me begin to love our old mother again more than before. Anyway, as married people our parents were exemplary, like Roulin and his wife to quote another specimen. Well, go straight ahead along that road. During my illness I again saw each room in the house at Zundert, each path, each plant in the garden, the views round about, the fields, the neighbours, the cemetery, the church, our kitchen garden behind — right up to the magpies’ nest in a tall acacia in the cemetery. That’s because I still have the most primitive memories of all of you, of those days; to remember all this there’s now only Mother and me. I shan’t go on since it’s better that I don’t try to restore everything that passed through my mind then. Know only that I’ll be very happy when your marriage has taken place. Listen now, if as regards your wife it would perhaps be good for a painting of mine to be at the Goupils’ from time to time, then I’ll drop my old grudge that I have against them in the following way. I said that I didn’t want to return there with too innocent a painting.
   But you can exhibit the two canvases of sunflowers there if you wish. Gauguin would be pleased to have one of them, and I very much enjoy doing Gauguin quite a big favour. So, he wants one of those two canvases, well I’ll do one of them over again, the one he wants. You’ll see that these canvases will catch the eye. But I’d advise you to keep them for yourself, for the privacy of your wife and yourself. It’s a type of painting that changes its aspect a little, which grows in richness the more you look at it. Besides, you know that Gauguin likes them extraordinarily. He said to me about them, among other things: ‘that — ... that’s... the flower’. You know that Jeannin has the peony, Quost has the hollyhock, but I have the sunflower, in a way. And all in all it will give me pleasure to continue the exchanges with Gauguin, even if sometimes it costs me dear too. Did you see, during your fleeting visit, the portrait in black and yellow of Mrs Ginoux? That’s a portrait painted in 3 quarters of an hour. I must finish for the moment. The delay in sending the money is sheer chance, and thus neither you nor I could do anything about it. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Just a few words to tell you that I’m getting along so-so as regards my health and work. Which I already find astonishing when I compare my state today with that of a month ago. I well knew that one could break one’s arms and legs before, and that then afterwards that could get better but I didn’t know that one could break one’s brain and that afterwards that got better too. I still have a certain ‘what’s the good of getting better’ feeling in the astonishment that an ongoing recovery causes me, which I wasn’t in a state to dare rely upon. When you visited I think you must have noticed in Gauguin’s room the two no. 30 canvases of the sunflowers. I’ve just put the finishing touches to the absolutely equivalent and identical repetitions. I think I’ve already told you that in addition I have a canvas of a Berceuse, the very same one I was working on when my illness came and interrupted me. Today I also have 2 versions of this one.
   On the subject of that canvas, I’ve just said to Gauguin that as he and I talked about the Icelandic fishermen and their melancholy isolation, exposed to all the dangers, alone on the sad sea, I’ve just said to Gauguin about it that, following these intimate conversations, the idea came to me to paint such a picture that sailors, at once children and martyrs, seeing it in the cabin of a boat of Icelandic fishermen, would experience a feeling of being rocked, reminding them of their own lullabies. Now it looks, you could say, like a chromolithograph from a penny bazaar. A woman dressed in green with orange hair stands out against a green background with pink flowers. Now these discordant sharps of garish pink, garish orange, garish green, are toned down by flats of reds and greens. I can imagine these canvases precisely between those of the sunflowers – which thus form standard lamps or candelabra at the sides, of the same size; and thus the whole is composed of 7 or 9 canvases. (I’d like to make another repetition for Holland if I can get the model again.) 
   As it’s still winter, listen. Let me quietly continue my work, if it’s that of a madman, well, too bad. Then I can’t do anything about it. However, the unbearable hallucinations have stopped for now, reducing themselves to a simple nightmare on account of taking potassium bromide, I think. It’s still impossible for me to deal with this question of money7 in detail, but I want to deal with it in detail all the same, and I’m working furiously from morning till night to prove to you (unless my work is yet another hallucination), to prove to you that really, truly, we’re following in Monticelli’s track here and, what’s more, that we have a light on our way and a lamp before our feet8 in the powerful work of Bruyas of Montpellier, who has done so much to create a school in the south. Only don’t be absolutely too amazed if, in the course of the coming month, I would be obliged to ask you for the month in full, and even the relative extra included. After all, it’s only right if in these productive times when I expend all my vital warmth 
   I should insist on what is necessary to take a few precautions. The difference in expenditure is certainly not excessive on my part, not even in cases like that. And once again, either lock me up in a madhouse straightaway, I won’t resist if I’m wrong, or let me work with all my strength, while taking the precautions I mention. If I’m not mad the time will come when I’ll send you what I’ve promised you from the beginning. Now, these paintings may perhaps be fated for dispersal, but when you, for one, see the whole of what I want, you will, I dare hope, receive a consolatory impression from it. You saw, as I did, a part of the Faure collection file past in the little window of a framer’s shop in rue Lafitte, didn’t you? You saw, as I did, that this slow procession of canvases that were previously despised was strangely interesting. Good. My great desire would be that sooner or later you should have a series of canvases from me that could also file past in that exact same shop window. 
   Now, in continuing the furious work this February and March I hope I’ll have finished the calm repetitions of a number of studies I did last year. And these, together with certain canvases of mine that you already have, such as the harvest12 and the white orchard, will form quite a firm base. During this same time, so no later than March, we can settle what has to be settled on the occasion of your marriage. But although I’ll work during February and March, I’ll consider myself to be still ill, and I tell you in advance that in these two months I may have to take 250 a month from the year’s allowance. You’ll perhaps understand that what would reassure me in some way regarding my illness and the possibility of a relapse would be to see that Gauguin and I didn’t exhaust our brains for nothing at least, but that good canvases result from it. And I dare hope that one day you’ll see that in remaining upright and calm now, precisely on the question of money – it will be impossible later on to have acted badly towards the Goupils. 
   If indirectly I’ve eaten some of their bread, certainly through you as an intermediary –  Directly I will then retain my integrity. So, far from still remaining awkward with each other almost all the time because of that, we can feel like brothers again after that has been sorted out. You’ll have been poor all the time to feed me, but I’ll return the money or turn up my toes. Now your wife will come, who has a good heart, to make us old fellows feel a bit younger again. But this I believe, that you and I will have successors in business, and that precisely at the moment when the family abandoned us to our own resources, financially speaking, it will again be we who haven’t flinched. My word, may the crisis come after that... Am I wrong about that, then? Come on, as long as the present earth lasts there will be artists and picture dealers, especially those who are apostles at the same time, like you. 
   And if ever we’re comfortably off, even while perhaps being old Jewish smokers, at least we’ll have worked by forging straight ahead and won’t have forgotten the things of the heart that much, even though we have calculated a little. What I tell you is true: if it isn’t absolutely necessary to shut me away in a madhouse then I’m still good for paying what I can be considered to owe, at least in goods. Then, my dear brother, we have 89. The whole of France shivered at it and so did we old Dutchmen, with the same heart.  Beware of 93, you may perhaps tell me. Alas there’s some truth in that, and that being the case let’s stay with the paintings. In conclusion I must also tell you that the chief inspector of police came yesterday to see me, in a very friendly way. He told me as he shook my hand that if ever I had need of him I could consult him as a friend. To which I’m a long way from saying no, and I may soon be in precisely that case if difficulties were to arise for the house. I’m waiting for the moment to come to pay my month’s rent to interrogate the manager or the owner face to face.
   But to chuck me out they’d more likely get a kick in the backside, on this occasion at least. What can you say, we’ve gone all-out for the Impressionists, now as regards myself I’m trying to finish the canvases which will indubitably guarantee my little place that I’ve taken among them. Ah, the future of that... but from the moment when père Pangloss assures us that everything is always for the best in the best of worlds19 – can we doubt it? My letter has become longer than I intended, it matters little – the main thing is that I ask categorically for two months’ work before settling what will need to be settled at the time of your marriage. Afterwards, you and your wife will set up a commercial firm for several generations in the renewal. You won’t have it easy. And once that’s sorted out I ask only a place as an employed painter as long as there’s enough to pay for one. As a matter of fact, work distracts me. And I must have distractions – yesterday I went to the Folies Arlésiennes, the budding theatre here — it was the first time I’ve slept without a serious nightmare. They were performing — (it was a Provençal literary society) what they call a Noel or Pastourale, a remnant of Christian theatre of the Middle Ages. It was very studied and it must have cost them some money. 
   Naturally it depicted the birth of Christ, intermingled with the burlesque story of a family of astounded Provençal peasants. Good — what was amazing, like a Rembrandt etching — was the old peasant woman, just the sort of woman Mrs Tanguy would be, with a head of flint or gun flint, false, treacherous, mad, all that could be seen previously in the play. Now that woman, in the play, brought before the mystic crib — in her quavering voice began to sing and then her voice changed, changed from witch to angel and from the voice of an angel into the voice of a child and then the answer by another voice, this one firm and warmly vibrant, a woman’s voice, behind the scenes. That was amazing, amazing. I tell you, the so-called ‘Félibres’ had anyway spared themselves neither trouble nor expense. As for me, with this little country here I have no need at all to go to the tropics. I believe and will always believe in the art to be created in the tropics, and I believe it will be marvellous, but well, 
 0  personally I’m too old and (especially if I get myself a papier-mâché ear) too jerry-built to go there. Will Gauguin do it? It isn’t necessary. For if it must be done it will be done all on its own. We are merely links in the chain. At the bottom of our hearts good old Gauguin and I understand each other, and if we’re a bit mad, so be it, aren’t we also a little sufficiently deeply artistic to contradict anxieties in that regard by what we say with the brush? Perhaps everyone will one day have neurosis, the Horla, St Vitus’s Dance22 or something else. But doesn’t the antidote exist? In Delacroix, in Berlioz and Wagner? And really, our artistic madness which all the rest of us have, I don’t say that I especially haven’t been struck to the marrow by it. But I say and will maintain that our antidotes and consolations can, with a little good will, be considered as amply prevalent. See Puvis de Chavannes’ Hope. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Although I have nothing very, very unexpected to tell you I still want to let you know that last Monday I saw our friend Roulin again. There was good reason for it too — the whole of France having shivered. Certainly in our own eyes the election and its results and its representatives are only symbols. But one thing that has been proved once again is that worldly ambitions and glories pass — but that up to now the beating of the human heart remains the same and as much in touch with the past of our buried fathers as with the generation to come. This morning I had a very friendly letter from Gauguin to which I replied without delay. When Roulin came I had just finished the repetition of my sunflowers, and I showed him the two examples of the Berceuse between these four bouquets. Roulin sends you his warm regards. On Sunday in Marseille he was present at the crowd’s demonstration when the election result was telegraphed from Paris.
   Like Paris, Marseille was moved to the very depth of the depths of the souls of the common people, all together and taciturn. Ah well, who will now dare order any cannon, machine gun or Lebel rifle4 to fire when so many hearts have been given in advance to serve as stoppers for the cannons? All the more so since certainly the victorious politicians of this great day today, Rochefort and Boulanger, are with one common accord more ambitious for the cemetery than for any throne. Anyhow, that was our interpretation of the event, not just Roulin’s and mine but that of many others. We were very moved all the same. Roulin told me that he almost wept when he saw that silent Marseille crowd, and that he hadn’t recovered his composure until he turned round and saw some very, very old friends, who hesitated to recognize him, by sheer chance. They then went off to have supper together until late into the night. 
   Although he was very tired he wasn’t able to resist the desire to come to Arles to see his family again and, almost falling over with tiredness and very pale, he came to shake our hands. I could just show him the two examples of the portrait of his wife, which pleased him. From what people tell me I’m very obviously looking better; on the inside my heart is a little too full of so many diverse emotions and hopes, for it astonishes me that I’m getting better. Everyone here is good towards me, the neighbours &c., good and attentive as in one’s native country. I know already that several people here would ask me for portraits if they dared ask for them. As Roulin, poor poverty-stricken devil and lowly employee as he is, is held in very, very great esteem here, people found out that I had done all his family. My dear brother, in times to come we may indeed fall into suffering again, into errors, into misfortune, I don’t deny it. But we’ll always have worked in this 89 here with the French we love so much, as on their side, too, they make us feel the fatherland. 
   Now we have experienced that, at any rate. Don’t talk to your fiancée about this matter between us, leave me as I’ve asked you, to work until the last day of March. And from now until then I’ll have done a few Impressionist canvases, come on. Today I started work on a third Berceuse. I do know that it’s neither drawn nor painted as correctly as a Bouguereau, which I almost regret, as I seriously have the desire to be correct — but although it isn’t therefore fated to be a Cabanel or a Bouguereau, I yet hope that it’s French. The weather today has been magnificent with no wind, and I wanted so much to work that I’m astonished by it, as I hadn’t expected it any more. I’ll end this letter like the one to Gauguin by telling you that there are indeed still signs of the previous over-excitement in my words, but that there’s nothing surprising about that, since in this good Tarascon country everyone is a touch cracked. Good handshake, to De Haan and Isaäcson as well. Ever yours, Vincent I’ll expect your letter as early as possible after 1 February. My dear Theo, I would have preferred to reply to you immediately about the very kind letter containing 100 francs, but as I was very tired at that precise moment, and as the doctor1 had absolutely ordered me to go for walks without mental work, because of that it’s only today that I write to you. As for work, the month hasn’t been bad after all, and the work distracts me, or rather keeps me in order, so I don’t deprive myself of it. I’ve done the Berceuse three times, now since Mrs Roulin was the model and I was only the painter, I let her choose between the three, her and her husband, only on condition that I’d do a repetition for myself of the one she took, which I’m working on at present. You ask me if I’ve read Mistral’s Mireille – I’m like you, I can only read it in fragments of the translation. But have you heard it yet, for perhaps you know that Gounod has set it to music. I think so anyway. Naturally I don’t know this music, and even if I was listening to it I would rather be looking at the musicians than listening. 
   But I can tell you this, that the original language from here in words sounds so musical in the mouths of the Arlésiennes that my word yes, from time to time I catch fragments of it. Perhaps in the Berceuse there’s an attempt at a little music of colour from here, it’s badly painted, and chromos bought at the penny bazaar are infinitely better painted technically, but all the same. Here – the so-called good town of Arles is a funny place which for good reasons friend Gauguin calls the filthiest place in the south. Now Rivet, if he saw the population, would certainly be sorry at times, saying over and over, ‘you’re all sick’ – as he says of us. But if you catch the local sickness, my word, afterwards you won’t be able to catch it again. This is to tell you that as for myself, I don’t have any illusions. It’s going very, very well and I’ll do everything that the doctor says but... When I came out of the hospital with good Roulin I fancied that I hadn’t had anything, only afterwards did I have the feeling that I’d been ill. What can you say, I have moments when I’m twisted by enthusiasm or madness or prophecy like a Greek oracle on her tripod.
   Then I have a great presence of mind in words and talk like the Arlésiennes, but I feel so weak with all that. Especially when my physical powers return. But I’ve already told Rey that at the slightest serious symptom I’d come back and then subject myself to the alienist doctors of Aix6 or to himself. What else can it do to us but bad things, and only cause us pain, you and me, if we aren’t well. Our ambition has sunk so low. So let’s work very calmly, look after ourselves as much as we can and not wear ourselves out in sterile efforts at reciprocal generosity. You’ll do your duty and I’ll do mine, as far as that’s concerned both of us have already paid for it other than in words and, at the end of the road, possibly we’ll see each other calmly again. But myself, whereas in my delirium all things I love so much are in turmoil, I can’t accept that as reality and am not acting the false prophet. Sickness or mortality, my word, that doesn’t surprise me, but ambition isn’t compatible, fortunately for us, with the professions we follow. 
   Besides, there are so many people who think this way, in several categories of society, from the highest to the lowest. But how come that you’re thinking about the little clauses of marriage and the possibility of dying at this moment, wouldn’t you have done better quite simply to have screwed your wife in advance? Anyway, that’s part of the customs of the north, and I’m not the one to say they don’t have good customs in the north. It will come back, really. But as for me without a sou, in this case I still say that money is one kind of currency and painting another. And I’m already able to send you a consignment in the sense mentioned in the previous writings. But it will get bigger if my strength comes back to me. So I would like only, should Gauguin, who has a complete infatuation with my sunflowers, take these two paintings from me, that he gives your fiancée or you two of his paintings, not mediocre ones but better than mediocre. And if he takes a version of the Berceuse all the more reason why he should also give something good on his part. Without that I couldn’t complete this series I was telling you about, which must be able to go into the same little shop window we’ve looked into so often.
   The value of a painting in a case like this doesn’t come into it and I declare that I’m no expert. It remains that my social position may be as dear to me as yours as a good employee is to you. And let me say just this, I attach as much importance as you do to a brotherly honesty as regards Boussod’s money. We have never served it ill. And we’ve worn ourselves out too much to do the right thing to be able to get angry at being called thieves or incompetents, what’s more, I won’t go on about it. For the Independents, it seems to me that six paintings is too many by half. To my taste the harvest11 and the white orchard12 are enough, with the little Provençal girl13 or the sower14 if you want. But it’s all the same to me. I just really want one day to give you a more consolatory impression in our trade of painting in which we work, by means of a collection of around 30 more serious studies. In any case, that will prove to our real friends like Gauguin, Guillaumin, Bernard &c. that we’re engaged in the work of production. 
   Ah well, as for the little yellow house, when I paid my rent the landlord’s agent15 was very nice and behaved like an Arlesian, treating me as an equal. So I told him that I had no need of a lease, nor of a written statement of intent, preferably in writing, and that in the case of illness I would only pay by friendly agreement. Here the people have their hearts in the right place, and a spoken word is more binding than a written one. So I’m keeping the house for the time being, since I need to feel at home here for the sake of my mental recovery. Now as regards your move from rue Lepic to rue Rodier16 I can’t have an opinion, not having seen it, but the main thing is precisely that you also lunch at home with your wife. By staying in Montmartre you’ll be decorated and Minister for Fine Arts more quickly, but as you don’t much care about that it’s better to have tranquillity at home, so I think you’re completely right. 
   I too am a little like that – to the local people who ask after my health I always say that I’ll begin by dying of it with them and that afterwards my sickness will be dead. That doesn’t mean to say that I won’t have considerable periods of respite. But once you’re seriously ill you well know that you can’t catch the sickness twice, being healthy or sick is the same thing as being young or old. Only be well aware of the fact that like you, I’m doing what the doctor tells me as much as I can. And that I consider that as a part of the work and the duty one has to carry out. I must say this, that the neighbours &c. are particularly kind towards me, everyone here suffering either from fever or hallucinations or madness, we get along like members of the same family. Yesterday I went back to see the girl I went to when I went out of my mind. I was told there that things like that aren’t at all surprising around here. She had suffered from it and had fainted but had regained her composure. And what’s more, people say good things of her. But as to considering myself completely healthy, we shouldn’t do it. 
   The local people who are ill like me indeed tell me the truth. You can live to be old or young, but you’ll always have moments when you lose your head. So I don’t ask you to say of me that there’s nothing wrong with me, or won’t be. Only the Ricord of that is probably Raspail. I haven’t yet had the local fevers, and I could still catch them too. But here they’re already well-versed in all that at the hospital, and so from the moment when you have no false shame and say frankly what you feel, you can’t go wrong. I’m closing this letter for this evening, with good handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, As long as my mind was so out of sorts it would have been fruitless to try and write to you to reply to your kind letter. Today I’ve just returned home for the time being, I hope for good. There are so many moments when I feel completely normal, and actually it would seem to me that, if what I have is only a sickness peculiar to this area, I should wait quietly here until it’s over. Even if it were to happen again (which, let’s say, won’t be the case). But here is what I’m saying once and for all to you and to Mr Rey. If sooner or later it were desirable that I should go to Aix, as has already been suggested2 – I consent in advance and will submit to it. But in my capacity as painter and workman it isn’t permissible for anyone, not even you or the doctor, to take such a course of action without warning me and consulting me myself about it too, because as up to now I’ve always kept my relative presence of mind3 for my work, it’s my right to say then 
   (or at least to have an opinion on) what would be best, to keep my studio here or to move completely to Aix. That in order to avoid the expenses and the losses of a move as much as possible, and not to do it except in the event of an absolute emergency. It appears that the people around here have a legend that makes them afraid of painting and that people talked about that in the town. Good. As for me, I know that it’s the same thing in Arabia, and yet we have heaps of painters in Africa, don’t we? Which proves that with a little firmness one can alter these prejudices, or at least do one’s painting all the same. The unfortunate thing is that I’m rather inclined to be impressed, to feel the beliefs of other people myself and not always to laugh at the foundation of truth that there may be in the absurd. Besides, Gauguin is like that too, as you were able to observe, and was himself also tired out at the time of his stay by some malaise or other. As I’ve already been staying here for more than a year, and have heard people say pretty much all the bad things possible about me, about Gauguin, about painting in general,    why shouldn’t I take things as they are and wait for the outcome here. Where can I go that’s worse than where I’ve already been twice – the isolation cell. The advantages that I have here are, as Rivet would say – first – ‘they’re all sick’ here, and so at least I don’t feel alone. Then, as you well know, I love Arles so much, although Gauguin is darned right to call it the filthiest town in all of the south. And I’ve found so much friendship already from the neighbours, from Mr Rey, from everyone at the hospital for that matter, that really I’d prefer to be always ill here than to forget the kindness there is in the same people who have the most incredible prejudices towards painters and painting, or in any case have no clear and healthy idea whatsoever about it as we do. Then at the hospital they know me now, and if this were to come on again it would pass in silence, and at the hospital they’d know what to do. I have absolutely no desire to be treated by other doctors, nor do I feel the need for it. 
   The only desire I might have is to be able to continue to earn with my own hands what I spend. Koning has written me a very kind letter, saying that he and a friend would probably come to the south with me for a long time. That in response to a letter I wrote him a few days ago. I no longer dare to urge painters to come here after what has happened to me, they run the risk of losing their heads like me. The same thing for De Haan and Isaäcson. Let them go to Antibes, Nice, Menton, it’s perhaps healthier. Mother and our sister also wrote to me, the latter was very upset about the sick woman she was caring for. At home they’re very pleased about your marriage. Be well aware that you mustn’t preoccupy yourself with me too much, nor fret yourself. It must probably run its course, and we couldn’t change very much about our fate with precautions. Once again, let’s try to seize our fate in whatever form it comes. Our sister wrote to me that your fiancée would come to stay with them for a while. That is well done. Ah well, I shake your hand most heartily, and let us not be discouraged. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent Warm regards to Gauguin, I hope he’s going to write to me, I’ll write to him too. Address next letter place Lamartine. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for your kind letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. Is your own health reasonably good, and is the weather in Paris bearable? Here we have days of sunshine and wind, I walk a lot to take the air. Up to now I’ve been sleeping and eating at the hospital. Yesterday and today I began to work. When Mrs Roulin also left, to go and live with her mother in the country for the time being, she took away the Berceuse. I had the sketch of it and two repetitions. She had a good eye and took the best one, only I’m currently redoing it. And I don’t want this one to be inferior. I have this to say in reply to Mourier’s letter, which gave me pleasure:3 if Gauguin wants to make an exchange with you for a version of the Berceuse, he can send it to his wife in Denmark, and in this way I would gladly see a canvas of mine there. But as I’ve already told you, perhaps this canvas is incomprehensible. I would also wish to send something to Holland. But I haven’t got up my confidence for all of that yet. 
   Will you see a bit of greenery there, in your new apartment? I hope so. As regards Koning, really I daren’t encourage him too much to come here, nor even with his gusto to get carried away with the south, with the experience I’m having of it at the moment. If he goes to Nice, Menton, where it may be healthier, he’s bound to be cheated by the gamblers because of his good humour &c., for that’s a real nuisance, even here already, and warps characters. But fortunately, if he goes there he won’t go there alone. For his painting, certainly there are some very fine things here. But if one has too many annoyances, what can one say and do then? Anyway, you can see that I don’t quite know what to think yet. Bernard has written to me as well. I haven’t been able to reply yet, for it’s so difficult to explain the nature of the difficulties one might encounter here, and with our northern or Parisian customs and ways of thinking it’s inevitable that if one stays here for a long time one must suffer something that isn’t amusing in these parts.
   Must however admit that in all the towns there are schools of drawing and masses of art lovers, but you understand that run by invalids or idiots of the fine arts it’s nothing but appearance and show. Mr Salles remitted me the 50 francs immediately. It gives me great pleasure that Gauguin has finished some lithographs. I believe also what you say, that if one day it was to take a graver turn one would have to follow what the doctors said, and I don’t oppose that. But that day may not be tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. Now it isn’t rare in these parts, it appears, to see even an entire population seized by panic – thus at Nice during the earth tremor. Currently all the town is anxious, nobody knows precisely why, and I saw in the newspapers that recently in places not very distant from here there had been more light shakes of earth tremor again. All the more reason, then, for me to be of the opinion that, as far as I myself am concerned, I should wait with as much patience as I can muster, hoping that afterwards it will settle down again. 
   At another moment, if I were less impressionable, I would probably poke a good deal of fun at what seems to me to be askew and deranged in the local customs. At present, from time to time it doesn’t have a very happy effect on me. Right, well – in fact, there are so many painters who are cracked in one way or another that little by little I’ll be consoled by it. More than ever I understand the sufferings of Gauguin, who caught the same thing in the tropics, an excessive sensitivity. At the hospital I just glimpsed a sick negress who’s living there and works as a servant. Tell him that. If you were to say to Rivet that you have so many anxieties for me he’ll certainly reassure you by saying that, because there’s so much affinity and community of ideas between us, you feel the same thing a little. Don’t think too much about me – with an idée fixe. What’s more, I’ll get along better if I know that you’re calm. Whatever happens, aren’t there a great many of us in France who try to remain calm whatever happens, adversity or prosperity? I shake your hand firmly in thought. You’re really kind to say that I could come to Paris, but I think that the bustle of a big city will never be worth anything to me. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent 19 March. My dear brother, I seemed to see so much restrained brotherly anguish in your kind letter that it seems to me to be my duty to break my silence. I write to you in full possession of my presence of mind and not like a madman but as the brother you know. Here is the truth: a certain number of people from here have addressed a petition (there were more than 80 signatures on it) to the mayor (I think his name is M. Tardieu) designating me as a man not worthy of living at liberty, or something like that. The chief of police or the chief inspector then gave the order to have me locked up once again. Anyway, here I am, shut up for long days under lock and key and with warders in the isolation cell, without my culpability being proven or even provable. It goes without saying that in my heart of hearts I have a lot to say in reply to all that. It goes without saying that I shouldn’t get angry, and that apologizing would seem to me to be accusing myself in such a case. Only to warn you: to free me – first I don’t ask it, being sure that all of this accusation will be reduced to nothing. Only I say to you, you would find it difficult to free me. If I didn’t restrain my indignation I would immediately be judged to be a dangerous madman. In waiting let us hope, besides, strong emotions could only aggravate my state. If in a month’s time, though, you have no direct news of me, then act, but as long as I’m writing to you, wait. 
   That’s why I now ask you to promise to let them act without getting yourself mixed up in it. Consider yourself warned that it would perhaps complicate and confuse the matter. All the more so since you’ll understand that while I’m absolutely calm at the given moment, I may easily fall back into a state of over-excitement through new moral emotions. So you can imagine how much of a hammer-blow full in the chest it was when I found out that there were so many people here who were cowardly enough to band themselves together against one man, and a sick one at that. Good. That’s for your guidance; as regards my moral state, I’m badly shaken, but all the same I’m recovering a certain calm so as not to get angry. Besides, humility suits me after the experience of repeated attacks. So I’m being patient. The main thing, I couldn’t say it too often, is that you should keep your calm too, and that nothing 
   should disturb you in your affairs. After your marriage we can deal with sorting all this out, and in the meantime, my word, leave me here quietly. I’m convinced that Mr Mayor, as well as the chief of police, are more like friends and that they’ll do everything they can to settle all this. Here, except for freedom, except for lots of things that I would wish otherwise, I’m not too bad. Besides, I told them that we weren’t in a position to bear expenses. I can’t move without expenses, now I haven’t been working for 3 months, and mind you, I would have been able to work if they hadn’t exasperated and bothered me. How are Mother and our sister? Having nothing else to distract me – I’m even forbidden to smoke – which, however, the other patients are allowed to do. Having nothing else to do I think about all those I know all day and night long. What misery – and all of it, so to speak, for nothing. I won’t hide from you that I would have preferred to die than to cause and bear so much trouble. What can you say, to suffer without complaining is the only lesson that has to be learned in this life.
   Now, in all that, if I must resume my task of painting I naturally need my studio, the furniture, which we certainly can’t afford to renew if it’s lost. To be reduced once again to living in the hotel, you know that my work won’t allow it, I must have a fixed pied-à-terre. If these fellows here protest against me, I protest against them, and they just have to provide me with damages and interest in a friendly way, in short they just have to give me back what I would lose by their fault and ignorance. If – let’s say – I were to become definitively insane – certainly I don’t say that it’s impossible, in any case they should treat me differently, give me back the fresh air, my work &c. Then – my word – I would resign myself. But we aren’t even there yet, and if I’d had my tranquillity I’d have been back on my feet long ago. They scold me about what I’ve smoked and drunk, fine. But what can you say, with all their sobriety they’re actually only giving me new miseries. My dear brother, the best thing remains perhaps to joke about our little miseries, and also a little about the great ones of human life. Take it like a man and walk dead straight towards your goal. We artists in present-day society are no more than the broken pitcher. How I’d like to be able to send you my canvases, but everything is under lock and key, police and keepers of the insane. Don’t free me, it will settle itself on its own – all the same, warn Signac that he shouldn’t get involved until I write again, for he’d be putting his hand into a wasps’ nest. I shake your hand most cordially in thought, regards to your fiancée, to Mother and our sister. Ever yours, Vincent I’ll read this letter as it stands to Mr Rey, who isn’t responsible, having been ill himself – no doubt he’ll write to you himself too. My house has been shut up by the police. I have a vague memory of a registered letter from you for which I was made to sign but which I didn’t want to accept because they were making such a fuss for the signature, and of which I’ve since had no more news. Explain to Bernard that I haven’t been able to reply to him, it’s quite a performance to write a letter: at least as many formalities are necessary as in prison now. Tell him to ask Gauguin for advice, but shake his hand firmly from me. Once again warm regards to your fiancée and to Bonger. I would have preferred not to write to you yet for fear of compromising you and disturbing you in what must work out above all. It will settle itself, it’s too idiotic to last. When you move house, address please. 
   I had hoped that Mr Rey would come to see me in order to talk with him before sending this letter, but although I had made it known that I was waiting for him, nobody came. I urge you again to be cautious. You know what it is to go to the civil authorities to complain. Wait until your journey to Holland at least. I myself fear a little that if I go outside at liberty I wouldn’t always be master of myself if I was provoked or insulted, and one could take advantage of that. The fact remains that a petition was sent to the mayor. I bluntly replied that I was entirely disposed to chuck myself into the water, for example, if that could make these virtuous fellows happy once and for all, but that in any case if in fact I had wounded myself I had done nothing of the sort to these people &c. So courage, then, although the guts fail me at times. Your coming here – my word – for the moment it would precipitate things. I’ll move house when I see the means naturally.
   I hope that this reaches you in good condition. Let’s not fear, I’m quite calm now. Leave them to their own devices. You will perhaps do well to write one more time, but nothing more for the moment. If I’m patient, that could only make me stronger so that I won’t be so much in danger of relapsing into a crisis. Naturally I who really have done my best to be friends with the people and didn’t suspect it, it has been a harsh blow to me. More soon, I hope, my dear brother, don’t worry. It’s perhaps a sort of quarantine I’m being put through. What do I know? My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter – which I’ve just received. All the more so since in this case I prefer to be wrong than to be right: certainly we’re absolutely, absolutely in agreement as regards the reasoning you give in your letter. I also envisage the thing that way. What’s new is that I think Mr Salles is trying to find me an apartment in another part of town. I approve of that, for in that way I wouldn’t be forced to move house immediately – I would keep a pied-à-terre, and then I could certainly make a trip as far as Marseille or further to find better. Mr Salles is very kind and very loyal, and it’s a happy contrast with others here. Anyway. That’s all that’s new for the moment. If on your side you would write, try to influence them so that I have the right to go out into the town nevertheless. As far as I can judge I’m not mad, strictly speaking. You’ll see that the canvases I’ve done in the intervals are calm and not inferior to others. I miss work rather than it tires me. 
   It would certainly give me pleasure to see Signac if he must pass through here anyway. They must then let me go out with him to show him my canvases. Then perhaps it would have been good that I should accompany him where he’s going, and that the two of us could have sought a new place, but there, since that’s actually scarcely probable, what’s the good of him putting himself out expressly to come and see me? What I find excellent in your letter is that you say that one mustn’t on any account have illusions about life. One must seize the reality of one’s fate and that’s that. I’m writing in haste to send this letter, which will perhaps not reach you until Sunday all the same, by which time Signac will already have left. I can’t do anything about that. All that I would ask is that people I don’t even know by name (for they took great care to 
   act so that I don’t know who sent that document in question) don’t meddle with me when I’m in the middle of painting, eating or sleeping or having a fuck in the brothel (not having a wife). Yet they meddle with all that. But despite all that I don’t give a damn at all – were it not for the pain I’m quite involuntarily causing you thus, or rather that they’re causing – and for the delay in work &c. These repeated and unexpected emotions, if they should continue, could change a fleeting, momentary mental disturbance into a chronic illness. Rest assured that if nothing happens I would now be able to do the same work in the orchards, and perhaps better, that I did the other year. Now let’s be as firm as possible, and in short not allow people to tread on our toes too much. Right from the beginning I had very malicious opposition here. All this fuss will naturally do good to ‘Impressionism’, but you and I personally, we’ll suffer for a bunch of bastards and cowards. There’s something to be said for keeping one’s indignation to oneself, isn’t there? Already I’ve seen in a newspaper here a really very good article on decadent or Impressionist literature6 – but what do these newspaper articles &c. do to you and me? As my good friend Roulin says, ‘it is acting as a pedestal for others’. At least one would wish to know for what or for whom, wouldn’t one? Then one couldn’t oppose it. But being a pedestal for something you aren’t aware of is annoying. 
   Anyway, all of that is nothing provided you walk straight towards your goal – once your home is secured, there’s a lot won for me too, and once that’s done we can perhaps rediscover a more peaceful path after your marriage. If sooner or later I became really mad I think I wouldn’t want to stay here at the hospital, but just for the moment I still want to leave here freely. For if I still understand myself a little there will be an interval between here and there. The best for me would certainly be not to remain alone, but I would prefer to remain eternally in a madhouse than to sacrifice another existence to my own. For the trade of painter is sad and bad these days. If I were a Catholic I could resort to making a monk of myself, but since I’m not exactly one, as you know, I don’t have that resort. The administration of the hospital is – how shall I put it – Jesuit, they’re very, very shrewd, very learned, very powerful, even Impressionistic... they know how to obtain information with an unheard-of subtlety – but – but – it astonishes and confuses me – yet... Anyway, there you have something of the cause of my silence, so stay apart from me for business matters, and in the meantime I am a man too, after all, you know, I’ll get by on my own, as regards what concerns me in matters of conscience. I shake your hand heartily in thought, tell your fiancée, Mother and our sister not to worry about me, and to believe that I’m well on the road to recovery. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, I’m writing to tell you that I’ve seen Signac, which did me a lot of good. He was very nice and very straight and very simple when the difficulty arose of whether or not to force open the door closed by the police, who had demolished the lock. They began by not wanting to let us do it, and yet in the end we got in. As a keepsake I gave him a still life which had exasperated the good gendarmes of the town of Arles because it depicted two smoked herrings, which are called gendarmes, as you know. You know that I did this same still life two or three times before in Paris, and once exchanged it for a carpet back then. That’s enough to say what people meddle in and what idiots they are. I find Signac very calm, whereas people say he’s so violent, he gives me the impression of someone who has his self-confidence and balance, that’s all. Rarely or never have I had a conversation with an Impressionist that was so free of disagreements or annoying shocks on either side. For example, he went to see Jules Dupré and reveres him. No doubt you had a hand in his coming to boost my morale a little, and thank you for that. I took advantage of my trip out to buy a book, Ceux de la glèbe by Camille Lemonnier. I’ve devoured two chapters of it – it’s so serious, so profound. Wait for me to send it to you. This is the first time for several months that I’ve picked up a book. That tells me a lot and heals me a great deal. In fact there are several canvases to send to you, as Signac was able to see – he wasn’t frightened by my painting, or so it seemed to me. 
   Signac thought I was looking well, and it’s perfectly true. On top of that, I have the desire and the taste for work. Of course, it’s still the case that if things were to be messed up for me in my work and in my life every day by gendarmes and venomous layabouts of municipal electors who petition against me to their mayor5 elected by them (and who is consequently keen on their votes) it would be only human on my part that I should succumb once more. Signac, I’m led to believe, will tell you something similar. In my opinion we must squarely oppose the loss of the furniture &c. Then – my word – I must have my freedom to practise my profession.  Mr Rey says that instead of eating enough and regularly I have been particularly sustaining myself with coffee and alcohol. I admit all that, but it will still be true that I had to key myself up a bit to reach the high yellow note I reached this summer. That, after all, the artist is a man at work, and that it’s not for the first passer-by who comes along to vanquish him once and for all. Must I suffer imprisonment or the madhouse – why not? Didn’t Rochefort with Hugo, Quinet and others give an eternal example by suffering exile, and the first even the penal colony.
   But all I want to say is that this is above the question of sickness and health. Naturally one is beside oneself in parallel cases – I don’t say equivalent cases, as I have only a very inferior and secondary place – but I say parallel. And that was the first and last cause of my going out of my mind. Do you know that expression by a Dutch poet I am tied to the earth With more than earthly bonds. That’s what I experienced in many moments of anguish – above all – in my so-called mental illness. Unfortunately I have a profession which I don’t know well enough to express myself as I would wish. I’ll stop dead for fear of relapsing, and move on to something else. Could you send me before you leave 

3  
tubes 
blanc zinc white


1
tube
same 
size 
cobalt


1
,,
,,
,,
ultramarine


4
,,
,,
,,
Veronese 
green


1
,,
,,
,,
emerald
,,


1
,,
,,
,,
orange lead


 This in case – probable if I find the means to take up my work again – that in a short while I can set to work again in the orchards.
   Ah, if only nothing had happened to mess things up for me! Let’s think carefully before going somewhere else. You can see that in the south I have no more luck than in the north. It’s about the same everywhere. I’m thinking of squarely accepting my profession as a madman just like Degas took on the form of a notary. But there it is, I don’t feel I quite have the strength needed for such a role. You speak to me of what you call ‘the real south’. Above is the reason why I’ll never go there. I rightly leave that to people more complete, more entire than myself. As for me, I’m good only for something intermediate and second-rate and insignificant.  However much intensity my feeling may have or my power of expression may acquire, at an age when the material passions are more burned out – never can I build an imposing edifice on such a mouldy, shattered past. So I don’t really mind what happens to me – even staying here – I think that my fate will be balanced in the long term. Beware of sudden impulses – since you’re getting married, and I’m getting too old – it’s the only policy that can suit us. More soon, I hope – write to me without much delay and believe me, after asking you to give my warm regards to Mother, Sister and your fiancée, your brother who loves you dearly, Vincent I’ll send you Camille Lemonnier’s book quite soon. My dear Theo, A few more words before you leave. Things are going well these days. The day before yesterday and yesterday I went into town for an hour to find things to work with. When I went home I was able to learn that the real neighbours, those whom I know, weren’t among those who got up that petition. However it may be, anyway I saw that I still had friends among them. If need be Mr Salles is pretty sure he can find me an apartment in another district in a few days. I’ve had another few books brought in order to have a few solid ideas in my mind. I’ve re-read La case de l’oncle Tom — you know, the book by Beecher Stowe on slavery2 — Dickens’s Contes de Noël, and I’ve given Mr Salles Germinie Lacerteux. And here I am, going back to my figure of the Berceuse for the 5th time. And when you see it you’ll agree with me that it’s nothing but a chromolithograph from a penny bazaar, and what’s more, it doesn’t even have the merit of being photographically correct in the proportions or in anything. But anyway, I’m trying to make an image such as a sailor who couldn’t paint would imagine it when he was in the middle of the sea and thought of a woman on land. They’re very, very attentive to me at the hospital these days, which — like many other things — mixes me up and makes me a little confused. Now I imagine that you’d prefer to marry without all the ceremonies and congratulations of a wedding, and am quite sure in advance that you’ll avoid them as much as possible. If you see Koning or others, and above all cousins Mauve and Lecomte, don’t forget to give them my warm regards. How strange these last three months appear to me. Sometimes nameless moral anguish, then moments when the veil of time and of the inevitability of circumstances seemed to open up a little way for the space of a blink of an eye. 
   Certainly, you’re right after all, darned right — even allowing for hope, one probably has to accept the rather distressing reality. I hope to throw myself back completely into work, which has fallen behind. Ah, I mustn’t forget to tell you a thing I’ve often thought about. Utterly by chance, in an article in an old newspaper, I found a line written on an ancient tomb at Carpentras, near here. Here is this very, very, very old epitaph, let’s say from the time of Flaubert’s Salammbô:7 ‘Thebe, daughter of Telhui, priestess of Osiris, who never complained about anyone.’8 If you were to see Gauguin you could tell him that. And I was thinking of a faded woman, at your place you have the study of that woman who had such strange eyes, whom I met by another chance. What does it mean, that ‘she never complained about anyone’? Imagine a perfect eternity, why not — but let’s not forget that reality in the old centuries has that... ‘and she never complained about anyone.’ 
   Do you remember that one Sunday good old Thomas came to see us and said, ah but — is it women like that who give you a hard-on? No, that doesn’t always produce a hard-on precisely, but anyway — from time to time in life one feels amazed, as if one was taking root in the ground. Now you talk to me of the ‘real south’ and as for me, I was saying that after all it seemed to me that it was rather for people who were more complete than me to go there. Is the ‘real south’ not to some degree the place where one might find a reason, a patience, a serenity sufficient to become like that good ‘Thebe — daughter of Telhui — priestess of Osiris — who never complained about anyone’? Beside that I feel like some kind of unworthy being. To you and your wife on the occasion of your marriage that is the happiness, the serenity I would ask for you two, to have that true south inwardly, in your souls. If I want this letter to leave today I must end it. Handshake, bon voyage, kind regards to Mother and Sister. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, A few words to wish you and your fiancée much happiness these days. It’s like a nervous tic with me that on the occasion of a day of celebration I generally experience difficulties in formulating a congratulation, but it shouldn’t be concluded from that that I desire your happiness less ardently than anyone else, as you well know. I still have to thank you for your last letter, as well as for the consignment of colours from Tasset1 and several issues of Le Fifre with drawings by Forain. The latter have often had the effect on me that what I manufacture becomes very sentimental in comparison. I waited a few days before replying, not knowing which day you would leave for Amsterdam, besides I also don’t know whether it’s in Breda or Amsterdam that you’ll be getting married. But if, as I’m led to believe, it will be in Amsterdam, then I presumed that you would find this letter there around Sunday. By the way — just today friend Roulin came to see me — he told me to give you his warm regards and to congratulate you. His visit gave me considerable pleasure, he often has to carry burdens which one would say were too heavy. As he has a strong peasant nature, that doesn’t prevent him from always looking well and even joyful — however for me, who am always learning something new from him, what lessons for the future there are in his conversation when he seems to say that the road doesn’t become easier as one advances in life. 
   I talked with him to have his opinion on what I ought to do as regards the studio, which I must leave in any case, as I was advised by Mr Salles and Rey, at Easter. I told Roulin that having done many things to put this house in a much better state than I had taken it in, and above all for the gas which I had put in, I considered it as a piece of work we have done. I’m being forced to leave — all right — but to take away the gas — to make a fuss for damages or something else, certainly there would be justification but I don’t have the heart for it. The only thing that I find possible in this case is to tell ourselves that we’d have tried to set up a habitation for unknown successors. And besides, before seeing Roulin I had already been to the gasworks5 to arrange it so. And Roulin was of the same opinion. He’s planning to remain in Marseille. I’m well these days, apart from a certain vague background sadness that’s hard to define — but anyway — I’ve gained physical powers rather than lose them, and I’m working. Just now I have on the easel an orchard of peach trees beside a road with the Alpilles in the background. It appears that there’s a fine article on Monet in Le Figaro, Roulin had read it and had been struck by it, he said. 
   All in all it’s quite a difficult question to resolve, to take a new apartment, and even to find it, especially by the month. Mr Salles spoke to me of a house at 20 francs which is very good, but he isn’t sure that I’ll be able to have it. At Easter I’ll have to pay 3 months’ rent, the removal costs &c. All that is neither cheering nor convenient. Especially since absolutely nothing promises us better luck. Roulin was saying, or rather made it understood, that he didn’t at all like the anxiety that has reigned here in Arles this winter, even considered completely outside the share that fell on me. Anyway, it’s like that just about everywhere, business affairs that aren’t going well, worn-out resources, discouraged people and — — — — as you were saying, not content to remain spectators and becoming wicked through lack of occupation. If someone still laughs or works, they come down on him fast. Anyway, my dear brother, I think that soon I’ll no longer be ill enough to remain confined. Apart from that, I’m beginning to get accustomed to it, and if I had to remain in a hospital for good I would get used to it, and I think that I could find subjects for painting there as well. 
   Write to me soon if you find the time. Roulin’s family was still out in the country, and although he’s earning a little more, since the separate expenses are increased in proportion, they’re not a mite better off in reality, and he wasn’t without very distressing anxieties. Fortunately the weather is fine and the sun glorious, and the people here momentarily quickly forget all their troubles and then glow with energy and illusions. These last few days I’ve been reading Dickens’s Contes de Noël, in which there are things so profound that one must re-read them often, it has a very great deal in common with Carlyle. While Roulin isn’t exactly old enough to be like a father to me, all the same he has silent solemnities and tendernesses for me like an old soldier would have for a young one. Always — but without a word — a certain something that seems to mean: we don’t know what will happen to us tomorrow, but think of me in any event. And that does one good when it comes from a man who is neither embittered nor sad, nor perfect, nor happy, nor always irreproachably just, but such a good soul and so wise and so moved and so full of belief. Listen — I have no right to complain of anything to do with Arles when I think of certain people I’ve seen there and whom I’ll never be able to forget. It’s late, once again I wish you and Jo much happiness, and handshakes in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m rather surprised that you haven’t written to me once these last few days. However, like the previous time when you went to Holland, it’s above all sheer chance. Now I hope that all these things have gone well for you. In the meantime I’ve been obliged to ask Tasset for 10 metres of canvas and a few tubes. Also I still need 

12 
zinc white 
large 
tubes


1
Emerald
,,
,,


2
Cobalt
,,
,,


2
Ultramarine
,,
,,


1
Vermilion
,,
,,


4
Veronese Green
,,
,,


3
Chrome  I
,,
,,


1
      ,,               II
,,
,,


2
Geranium lake medium tubes


 I have 6 spring studies, including two large orchards. It’s very urgent, because these effects are so fleeting.
   So write to me by return. I’ve taken an apartment of 2 small rooms at 6 (or 8 francs a month, water included) which belong to Mr Rey. It’s certainly not expensive, but not nearly as nice as the other studio. But to be able to move home and send you a consignment of canvases I would have to pay the other landlord. And that’s why I was more or less stunned that you hadn’t sent me anything. But anyway. Hoping again that all those marriage matters went off to your liking, wishing you and your wife lots of happiness with all my heart  Ever yours, Vincent Signac has asked me to join him in Cassis, but seeing as we have enough expenses without that, whatever I do or you do it isn’t within our means. My dear Theo You’ll probably be back in Paris when this letter arrives. I wish you and your wife lots of happiness. Thanks very much for your kind letter and for the 100-franc note it contained. Out of the 65 francs which I owe him, I’ve paid my landlord3 only 25 francs, having had to pay 3 months’ rent in advance on a room where I shan’t live but where I’ve stored my furniture, and having in addition had around ten francs in various removal expenses &c. Then, since my clothes were in not too brilliant a state – so that when I went out into the street it became necessary to have something new – I took a 35-franc suit and 4 francs for 6 pairs of socks. 
   Thus I have only a few francs left out of the note, and at the end of the month I must pay the landlord again, although we could make him wait a few days, more or less. At the hospital, after having settled the bill up to today, there’s still almost enough for the rest of the month from the money I still have on deposit there. At the end of the month I’d still wish to go to the mental hospital at St-Rémy or another institution of that kind, which Mr Salles has told me about. Forgive me for not going into details to weigh up6 the pros and the cons of such a course of action. 
   It would strain my mind a great deal to talk about it. It will, I hope, suffice to say that I feel decidedly incapable of starting to take a new studio again and living there alone, here in Arles or elsewhere – it comes down to the same thing – for the moment – I’ve nevertheless tried to make up my mind to begin again – for the moment not possible. I’d be afraid of losing the faculty of working, which is coming back to me now, by forcing myself to have a studio, and also having all the other responsibilities on my back. And for the time being I wish to remain confined, as much for my own tranquillity as for that of others. What consoles me a little is that I’m beginning to consider madness as an illness like any other and accept the thing as it is, while during the actual crises 
   it seemed to me that everything I was imagining was reality. Anyway, in fact I don’t want to think or talk about it. Excuse the explanations – but I ask you, and Messrs Salles and Rey, to act so that at the end of the month or the beginning of the month of May I may go there as a confined boarder. Beginning again this painter’s life I’ve led up to now, isolated in the studio sometimes, and without any other source of entertainment than to go to a café or a restaurant with all the criticism of the neighbours &c., I can’t do it. Going to live with another person, even another artist – difficult – very difficult – one takes too great a responsibility upon oneself. I dare not even think of it. Anyhow, let’s begin with 3 months, afterwards we’ll see. Now the cost of board must be around 80 francs and I’ll do a little painting and drawing. Without putting as much fury into it as the other year. 
   Don’t get upset about all this. So there you have it, these days have been sad, moving house, transporting all my furniture, packing up the canvases which I’ll send you, but above all it seemed sad to me that all that had been given to me by you with so much brotherly affection, and that for so many years, it was however you alone who supported me, and then to be obliged to come back to tell you all this sad story... but it’s difficult for me to express that as I felt it. The kindness you have had for me isn’t lost, since you have had it and you still have it, so even if the material results should be nil, you still have that all the more, but I can’t say that as I felt it. Now you well understand that if alcohol was certainly one of the great causes of my madness, then it came very slowly and would go away slowly too, should it go, of course. Or if it comes from smoking, same thing. 
   But I would hope only that it – this recovery... The frightful superstition of certain people on the subject of alcohol, so that they prevail upon themselves never to drink or smoke. We’re already advised not to lie or steal and not to commit other great or small crimes, and it becomes too complicated if it was absolutely indispensable not to possess anything but virtues in a society in which we’re very indubitably rooted, be it good or bad. I assure you that these strange days in which many things seem odd to me because my brain is shaken up, I don’t hate père Pangloss in all of this. But you’ll do me a service by tackling the question forthrightly with Mr Salles and Mr Rey. 
       It would seem to me that with a boarding cost of around seventy-five francs a month there must be a way of confining me such that I have all I need. Then I’d very much wish, if the thing is possible, to be able to go out in the daytime to go and draw or paint outside. Seeing as I go out here every day now, and I think that may continue. I warn you that by paying more I’d be less happy. The company of the other sick people, you understand, isn’t at all disagreeable to me, on the contrary it distracts me. Ordinary food suits me perfectly well, especially if, like here, I could be given a little more wine than usual down there, half a litre instead of a quarter, for example. 
   But a separate apartment, it remains to be seen what the rules of an institution like that will be. Be aware that Rey is overburdened with work, overburdened. If he or Mr Salles writes to you, it’s better to do exactly what they say. Anyway, my dear fellow, we must accept it, the illnesses of our time, all in all it’s only fair that having lived for years in relatively good health, sooner or later we have our share of them. As for me, you’ll feel a little that I wouldn’t exactly have chosen madness if there had been a choice, but once one has something like that one can’t catch it any more. However, in addition there will still perhaps be the consolation of being able to continue to work on some painting a little. What will you do so as not to say to your wife either too many good or too many bad things about Paris and of a heap of things? Do you feel in advance completely able to keep exactly the right measure always, from every point of view? 
   I shake your hand heartily in thought, I don’t know if I’ll write to you very, very often, because all my days aren’t clear enough to write somewhat logically. All your kindnesses for me, I’ve found them greater than ever today. I can’t tell you it as I feel it, but I assure you that that kindness has been of great worth, and if you don’t see its results, my dear brother, don’t be upset about it, you will still have your kindness. Only transfer this affection onto your wife as much as possible. And if we correspond a little less you’ll see that if she is as I think she is, she will console you. That’s what I hope. Rey is a really good fellow, terribly hard-working, always at the daily grind. What people today’s doctors are! 
 0  If you see Gauguin or if you write to him, give him my kind regards. I’ll be very happy to have a little news of what you say about Mother and Sister and whether they’re well, tell them to take my story, my word, as a thing they mustn’t upset themselves about excessively, for I’m relatively unfortunate, but in spite of that, after all, I perhaps still have some almost ordinary years ahead of me: it’s an illness like any other, and currently almost all those we know among our friends have something. So is it worth talking about? I regret causing trouble to Mr Salles, to Rey, especially also to you, but what can one do – the mind isn’t steady enough to begin again like before – so it’s a matter of no longer causing scenes in public, and naturally being a little calmer now, I feel completely that I was in an unhealthy state, mentally and physically. And people were kind to me then, those I remember and the rest, anyhow I’ve caused anxiety, and if I’d been in a normal state all of this wouldn’t have happened in that way. Adieu, write when you can. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I saw Mr Salles again and he told me what he’d written to you. I think it will be for the best like this, and I don’t see any other way. Thought is coming back gradually, but I can still act much much less practically than before. I’m absent-minded, and for the moment wouldn’t be able to control my life. But let’s leave that aside as much as possible. How are you, are you back? Must tell you that I think it possible that you’ll find Mr Salles’ letter still addressed to rue Lepic. How are things at home? I imagine Mother must have been pleased. I assure you that I’m much calmer now that I can tell myself that you have a companion for good. Above all, don’t imagine that I’m unhappy. I feel deeply that this has already worked away at me for a very long time, and that others, noticing the symptoms of mental derangement, naturally had apprehensions that were better founded than the confidence I thought I had in thinking normally. Which wasn’t the case, because for me that crisis3
   Anyway, it softens me a great deal in many judgements that, with more or less presumption, I’ve too often made about people who nevertheless wished me well. Anyway, it’s no doubt a pity that these reflections come to me a little late in the form of feelings. And that naturally I can’t change anything of the past. But I ask you to consider this closely, and to consider the course of action we’re taking today as I’ve talked about it with Mr Salles, to go into an asylum, as a simple formality, and in any case the repeated crises appear to me to have been serious enough not to hesitate. Besides, as to my future, it isn’t as if I were 20, since I’ve passed 36. There you are, it seems to me that it would be a torture as much for others as for myself if I left the hospital, for I feel and am as it were paralyzed when it comes to acting and getting by. Later on, my word, time will tell.
   Thus I’d like to ask you a heap of things about Holland and about recent days. Poor egotist that I’ve always been and still am now, I can’t shake off this idea, which, however, I’ve already explained to you two or three times, that it’s thus for the best that I go into an asylum right now. It may return in the long run. Anyway, my very meagre excuse is that painting narrows ideas for the rest perhaps. One can’t be in one’s profession and think of the rest at the same time. It’s a little inevitable – the profession is quite thankless and its usefulness is certainly contestable. And the thing I regret is not having gone into an asylum sooner, it would have been simpler. Remains, however, the fact that the idea of association of painters, of housing them together, some of them, although we haven’t succeeded, although it’s a deplorable and painful failure – this idea remains true and reasonable – like so many others. But no beginning again.
   Be well aware that we must take absolutely the simplest board and lodging. 80 francs must and can suffice, says Mr Salles. Rey warns me that at St-Rémy it wouldn’t go amiss to consider that many people are committed who are more or less well off, some of whom spend a lot of money. Which is often more harmful than useful to them. I can well believe that. And I think that for me, nature alone will do more good than remedies. Here I’m taking nothing. I’ll have to pay perhaps another 11. francs in movable property tax, I’ve been sent a bill for it at least, in addition to the rest of the rent that I still owe the landlord. And before going to St-Rémy I must send you my consignment of paintings, I’ve packed one crate already. I’d like to write to you about other things, but it preoccupies me now that this matter should be sorted out, I can’t find the ideas I seek to write to you about on several things at once. More soon, I hope that you and your wife had a good journey. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your kind letter, thanks for the good news it contained, and also for the 100-franc note. I was very, very happy to learn that you feel a little reassured by your marriage. Then what gave me great pleasure is that you say that Mother looks as if she’s getting younger. In a little while, of course, or already, she’s going to be worrying about seeing a child of yours. That is sure and certain. I much regret for you, as well as for your wife, that you’re not living in Ville-d’Avray, for example, instead of in Paris. But that will come, I hope. The main thing is now that you recuperate instead of wearing yourself out. I went to see Mr Salles with your letter for the director of the St-Rémy asylum, and he’s going there this very day, so by the end of the week I hope it will be settled. I myself wouldn’t be unhappy or discontented if in a little while from now I could enlist in the Foreign Legion for 5 years (one can be up to 40, I believe). My health from the physical point of view is better than before, and it would perhaps do me more good to do military service than all the rest. Anyway, I don’t say that one must or can do that without thought and without consulting a doctor, but anyway, 
   we must count on it that whatever we do it will be a little less good than that. Now, if not, naturally as long as it goes well I can always paint or draw, which I do not refuse in the least. To come to Paris or to go to Pont-Aven I don’t feel up to it, besides I have no keen desire or keen regret most of the time. From time to time, just as the waves crush themselves against the deaf, desperate cliffs, a storm of desire to embrace something, a woman of the domestic hen type, but anyway one must take that for what it is, an effect of hysterical over-excitement rather than an accurate vision of reality. Besides, Rey and I have already joked about it sometimes, for he says that love is also a microbe, which wouldn’t astonish me much, and couldn’t bother anyone, it would seem to me. Is not Renan’s Christ4 a thousand times more consoling than so many papier mâché Christs one is served up with in the Duval establishments called Protestant, Catholic or whatever else churches? And why wouldn’t it be so with love? 
   As soon as I can, I’m going to read Renan’s Antichrist, I haven’t the slightest idea what it will be, but I think in advance that I’ll find one or two ineffable things in it. Ah, my dear Theo, if you could see the olive trees at this time of year... The old-silver and silver foliage greening up against the blue. And the orangeish ploughed soil. It’s something very different from what one thinks of it in the north – it’s a thing of such delicacy – so refined. It’s like the lopped willows of our Dutch meadows or the oak bushes of our dunes, that’s to say the murmur of an olive grove has something very intimate, immensely old about it. It’s too beautiful for me to dare paint it or be able to form an idea of it. The oleander – ah – it speaks of love and it’s as beautiful as Puvis de Chavannes’ Lesbos, where there were women beside the sea. But the olive tree is something else, it is, if you want to compare it to something, like Delacroix. But I’m finishing this letter abruptly, I wanted to talk to you about a heap of other things, but it’s as I’ve already written to you, my ideas aren’t ordered.
   I’ll send 2 crates of paintings by goods train shortly. You mustn’t feel awkward about destroying a good number of them. I’ve had a letter from Wil, who’s going back to Mrs du Quesne’s, a very nice letter. Ah, cancer – it’s hard and difficult. By the way, do you know that it’s very curious that during all this strange and inexplicable movement which took place in Arles and in which I was mixed up, there was continual talk of cancer. I think that according to their belief, to these virtuous natives who know the future so well, it appears, I think, that according to them I would be gratified with that illness. About which naturally I know absolutely nothing, but anyway. All the same, it’s an adventure that remains absolutely inexplicable to me, besides I have to a large extent absolutely lost the memory of those days, and I can’t reconstruct anything. All the same, I would try to console myself about it by thinking that illnesses like that are perhaps to man what ivy is to the oak. I shake your hand heartily, and very many thanks. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, On the occasion of the first of May I wish you not too bad a year, and above all good health. How I’d like to be able to pass on some physical strength to you, I have a feeling of having too much of it at the moment. Which doesn’t prevent my mind from not yet being at all what it ought to be. How right Delacroix was, who lived on bread and wine alone, and who succeeded in finding a way of life in harmony with his profession. But the inevitable question of money always remains – Delacroix had a private income. Corot too. And Millet – Millet was a peasant and the son of a peasant. You’ll perhaps read with some interest the article I’m cutting out of a Marseille newspaper, because in it one glimpses Monticelli, and I find the description of the painting of a corner of the cemetery extremely interesting. But alas, it’s another still-lamentable story. How sad it is to think that a painter who succeeds, even half succeeds, in his turn pulls along half a dozen artists who are even greater failures than himself. However, think of Pangloss, think of Bouvard and Pécuchet, I know, then even that can be explained, but those people perhaps don’t know Pangloss, or else one forgets everything one knows about him under the inevitable bite of real despairs and great pains. And what’s more, under the name of optimism we fall back into a religion which to me has the look of being the rear end of a kind of Buddhism. Nothing bad about that, quite the opposite, if you like. I don’t much like the article on Monet in Le Figaro, how much better that other article in Le 19ième Siècle was! There one saw the paintings, and this one contains only banalities that make me melancholy.
   Today I’m packing up a crate of paintings and studies. There’s one which is flaking, onto which I’ve stuck newspapers – it’s one of the best and I think that when you look at it you’ll see more clearly what my studio, now foundered, could have been. This study, as well as a few others, was spoiled by damp during my illness. The water from a flood rose up to a few feet from the house10 and, more importantly, when I came back water and saltpetre were oozing from the walls because the house had been without a fire during my absence. That had an effect on me, not only the studio having foundered, but even the studies which would have been the memories of it damaged, it’s so final, and my urge to found something very simple but durable was so strong. It was fighting against insurmountable odds, or rather it was weakness of character on my part, for I still have feelings of grave remorse difficult to define. I think that was the cause of my crying out so much during the crises, that I wanted to defend myself and could no longer manage to. For it wasn’t for me, it was for the very painters like the unfortunate one spoken of in the enclosed article that this studio could have been of use. Anyway, there have been more than us before, Bruyas in Montpellier gave an entire fortune to it and an entire existence and without the least apparent result. Yes – a cold room in a municipal museum where one sees a deeply saddened face and lots of fine paintings, where certainly one is moved, but alas moved as in a cemetery.
   However, it would be difficult for one to walk in a cemetery demonstrating more clearly the existence of that Hope that Puvis de Chavannes painted. The paintings fade like flowers – thus even some Delacroixs had suffered, the magnificent Daniel, the Odalisques14 (quite different from those in the Louvre, it was in a single purplish range), but how that impressed me, those paintings that were fading there, little understood, it’s true, by the majority of visitors who look at Courbet and Cabanel and Victor Giraud &c. What are we, we painters? Well, I think that Richepin is often right, for example, when going at it point-blank he simply sends them back to the madhouse in his blasphemies. Now, though, I assure you that I know no hospital where one would want to take me for nothing, even supposing that I would take upon myself the expenses of my painting and would leave all my work to the hospital. And that is perhaps, I don’t say a great but anyway a small injustice. I would be resigned if I thought that. If I was without your friendship I would be sent back without remorse to suicide, and however cowardly I am, I would end up going there. There, as you will see I hope, is the point where we’re permitted to protest against society and to defend ourselves. You can be reasonably sure that the Marseille artist who committed suicide did not at all commit suicide from drinking absinthe, for the simple reason that nobody will have offered him any and that he wouldn’t have had 
   the means to buy any. Besides, it won’t have been solely for his pleasure that he drank, but because being ill already he kept himself going that way. Mr Salles has been to St-Rémy – they don’t want to allow me painting outside the establishment, nor to take me for less than 100 francs. So this information is bad indeed. If I could get out of it by enlisting for 5 years in the Foreign Legion, I think I’d prefer that. For on the one hand being locked up, not working I would recover with difficulty, on the other hand we’d be made to pay 100 francs a month all through a madman’s long life. It’s serious, and what can one do, let’s think about it. But will they want to take me on as a soldier? I feel very tired by the conversation with Mr Salles, and I don’t quite know what to do. I myself advised Bernard to do his military service, so is it so astonishing that I should think of going to Arabia myself as a soldier. I say this just in case; you shouldn’t blame me too much if I go. The rest is so vague and so strange. And you know how doubtful it is that one ever recovers what it costs to do painting. Besides, it seems to me that physically I am well. If I can’t work there except under supervision! and in the establishment – is it by God worth paying money for that! Certainly in the barracks I could then work as well and even better. Anyway, I’m thinking, do the same, let’s be aware that everything always happens for the best in the best of worlds, that isn’t impossible. I shake your hand very firmly. Ever yours, Vincent 
   This is what I consider worthy of being put on stretching frames in the consignment. 



the night café19


the green vineyard20
the red vineyard21
the bedroom22
the furrows23

ditto24


portrait  
of 
Boch25


,,
,,
Laval26


,,
,,
Gauguin27


,,
,,
Bernard28



The Alyscamps (lane of tombs)


ditto29
Garden with large conifer bush and oleanders30
ditto cedar and geraniums31
Sunflowers32
flowers: Scabious &c.
ditto: asters and marigolds &c. The crate contains some studies by Gauguin which belong to him, then his two fencing masks and fencing gloves. If there’s room in the crate I’ll add some stretching frames. My dear Theo, I recently sent off two crates of canvases. D58 and 59 – by goods train, and it will take a good week more before you receive them. There’s a heap of daubs in there which will have to be destroyed, but I’ve sent them as they are so that you can keep what appears passable to you. I’ve added Gauguin’s fencing masks and studies, and the Lemonnier book. Having taken the precaution of paying 30 francs to the bursar4 in advance I am naturally still here – but they wouldn’t be able to keep me here indefinitely and it’s more than time to decide. Bear in mind that by confining me in an asylum it will cost a lot in the long run, although less probably than taking another house – besides, beginning to live alone again absolutely horrifies me. I would like to enlist; what I fear here is – my accident being known here in town – that I will be turned down – but what I dread, or rather what makes me timid, is the possibility, the probability here of a rejection. If I had some acquaintance who could stick me in the legion for five years I would go. Only I don’t want that to be considered as a new act of madness on my part, and that’s why I’m talking to you about it as well as to Mr Salles, so that if I go it will be in all serenity and after due consideration. 
   For bear it firmly in mind, continuing to spend money on this painting when things could come to the point where there was a lack of money for housekeeping, that’s atrocious, and you’re sufficiently aware that the chance of succeeding is abominable. Besides, it has struck me so much that it’s such a force majeure that has frustrated me. Besides, in the future there would possibly be our sisters too for whom we should try to provide. Perhaps – I say – but anyway, whatever the case: if I knew that I would be accepted I would go to the legion. It’s that I’ve become timid and hesitant since, I live like a machine. However, my health is very good and I’m working a little. I have on the go an avenue of chestnut trees with pink flowers with a little cherry tree in flower and a wisteria plant and the path in the park flecked with sunlight and shade. It will make a pendant to the garden that’s in the walnut frame. If I speak to you of enlisting for five years don’t go and think that I’m doing it with an idea of sacrificing myself or doing good. I’m ‘in a hole’ in life, and my mental state not only is but also has been – distracted. 
   So that whatever might be done for me I can’t think of a way of balancing my life. Where I must follow a rule, like here at the hospital, I feel more tranquil. And in the armed forces it would be more or less the same thing. Now if here I certainly run a strong risk of being rejected because they know that I’m a madman or an epileptic, probably for good (although from what I’ve heard tell there are 50 thousand epileptics in France, of whom only 4, are confined, and that it’s thus not so extraordinary), perhaps in Paris by telling it for example to Detaille or Caran d’Ache I would soon be found a place. It would be no more of an impulse than anything else – anyway – let’s think about it – but in order to act. In the meantime I’m doing what I can, and I have a fair bit of good will to work at anything, painting included. But the money that painting costs, that crushes me under a feeling of debt and of cowardice, and it would be good for that to stop if possible. Besides, I’ve said once and for all, better if there’s a decision to be made at present that you and Mr Salles decide for me. And be well aware, I won’t refuse anything, not even going to St-Rémy, despite these obstacles of the cost of board and lodging being higher than we hoped at first, and not having complete freedom to go outside to paint. We must decide anyway, for they can’t keep me here indefinitely. 
   I was saying to the bursar that I was happy to pay for example 60 francs here instead of 45 if I could stay here indefinitely, but their rule is fixed price, it appears. So, although no one has said anything to me up to now, I think it would be right to leave. I could perhaps go again to lodge at the night café where I’ve stored my furniture, but... then I’m in daily contact with my very neighbours from a while ago, for it’s beside the house where I had my studio. In the town, though, at present nobody says anything to me any more, and I’m currently painting in the public garden without being disturbed much other than by the curiosity of passers-by. I’ve re-read the article on Monet from Le Figaro12 and it now appears much better to me than at first. As regards material things, let’s not become too discouraged but let’s try at least to be sensible about them. It’s still good that if necessary I can go and lodge in that night café here, and even board there, for those people are friends of mine – naturally also because I have been and am their customer. It has been very hot today, which always does me good. I’ve worked with more gusto than I had yet had. I give you a hearty handshake, you and your wife. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Your kind letter1 did me good today, my word – let’s go for St-Rémy then, but I tell you one more time, if after due consideration and consultation with the doctor it would be perhaps either necessary or simply useful and wise to enlist, let’s consider that with the same eye as the rest, and without prior prejudice against it. That’s all. For dismiss the idea of sacrifice in it – I was writing to our sister the other day that throughout my life, or almost at least, I’ve sought something other than a martyr’s career, of which I’m not capable. If I find annoyance or cause it, my word I remain stunned by it. Certainly I would gladly respect, I would admire martyrs &c., but you must know that in Bouvard et Pécuchet, for example, quite simply there is some other thing that adapts itself more to our little existences. Anyway, I’m packing my trunk, and probably Mr Salles will go there with me as soon as he can. Ah, what you said about Puvis and Delacroix4 is darned right, those fellows have well demonstrated what painting could be, but let’s not confuse things when there are immense distances. Now, myself as a painter, I’ll never signify anything important, I sense it absolutely. Supposing everything were changed, character, upbringing, circumstances, then this or that could have existed. But we’re too positive to confuse. I sometimes regret not having simply kept the Dutch palette of grey tones, and brushed landscapes in Montmartre without pressing the point.
   Also, I’m thinking of beginning to draw more with the reed pen again which, like last year’s views of Montmajour, is less expensive and distracts me just as much. Today I’ve made one of those drawings which became very dark and quite melancholic for springtime, but anyway, whatever happens to me and in whatever circumstances I find myself, that’s something that I could keep as an occupation for a long time, and in some way could even become a means of earning a livelihood. Anyway, all in all what does it matter to you or to me to have a little more or a little less annoyance. Certainly you joined up much earlier than I did, if we come to that, at the Goupils’, where all in all you spent some pretty bad moments often enough, for which you weren’t always thanked. And indeed you did it with zeal and devotion, because then our father rather had his back to the wall with the big family at the time, and it was necessary for you to throw yourself into it completely in order to make everything work. I’ve thought again with much emotion of all these old things during my illness. And in the end the main thing is to feel ourselves closely united, and that hasn’t yet been disturbed. 
   I have a certain hope that with what I know of my art in total, a time will come when I’ll produce again, although in the asylum. What use would the more artificial life of an artist in Paris be to me – one by which, all in all, I would only be half duped and for which I consequently lack primitive enthusiasm, indispensable for launching myself into it. Physically it’s amazing how well I am, but that isn’t enough of a basis for going on believing that it’s the same mentally. I would happily, once I was known there a little, try and make myself a male nurse little by little, in short to work at anything and take up an occupation again – the first one that comes along. I’ll have terrible need of père Pangloss7 when it naturally comes about that I become amorous again. Alcohol and tobacco have after all this good or bad point – it’s a bit relative, this – that they’re anti-aphrodisiacs, one should call it that I think. Not always to be despised in the exercise of the fine arts. Anyway, that will be the ordeal in which one mustn’t forget completely how to jest. For virtue and sobriety, I’m only too afraid, would lead me again into those parts where usually I very quickly lose the compass completely, and where this time I must try to have less passion and more bonhomie. 
   The possible passionate thing is no great thing for me, although the power remains, I dare believe, to feel oneself attached to the human beings with whom one lives. How is père Tanguy – you must give him my warm regards. I hear in the newspapers that there are good things at the Salon. Listen – don’t make yourself a completely exclusive Impressionist after all, if there’s good in something let’s not lose sight of it. Certainly colour is making progress, precisely by the Impressionists, even when they go astray. But Delacroix was already more complete than they are. And my goodness, Millet, who has hardly any colour, what work his is! Madness is salutary for this, that one becomes perhaps less exclusive. I don’t regret having wanted to know a little technically about this question of the theories of colours. As an artist one is merely a link in a chain, and whether you find or you don’t find, you can console yourself with that. I’ve heard talk of a completely green interior with a green woman at the Salon which people were saying good things about, as well as a portrait by Mathey, and another by Besnard, ‘The siren’. People were also saying that there’s something extraordinary by a fellow called Zorn, but they didn’t say what, and that there was a Carolus-Duran there, Triumph of Bacchus, bad. However, I still find his ‘Lady with a glove’ in the Luxembourg13 so good; anyway, there are things that aren’t serious that I like a lot, such as a book like Bel-ami. And Carolus’s work is a little like that. Our epoch has been like that, though, and all Badinguet’s time15 too. And if a painter does as he sees, he always remains someone. Ah, to paint figures like Claude Monet paints landscapes. That’s what remains to be done despite everything, and before, of necessity, one16 sees only Monet among the Impressionists.
   For after all in figures, Delacroix, Millet, several sculptors have otherwise done better than the Impressionists, and even J. Breton. Anyway, my dear brother, let’s be just, and I say to you as I retire, let’s think, just when we’re getting too old to class ourselves with the young ones, of what we have loved in our time, Millet, Breton, Israëls, Whistler, Delacroix, Leys. And be fully assured that I myself am sufficiently convinced that I shan’t see a future beyond that, nor moreover desire one. Now society is as it is, naturally we can’t wish for it to adapt itself just to our personal needs. Anyway, however while finding it really really good to go to St-Rémy, however with people like me it would really be more just to stuff them into the legion. We can’t do anything about it, but more than probably they’d refuse me there, at least here where my adventure is too well known, and above all exaggerated. I say this very, very seriously, physically I’m better than I have been for years and years, and I could do military service. So let’s think again about that while going to St-Rémy. I shake your hand heartily, and your wife’s too. Ever yours, Vincent 
   Ah, when I wrote to you that we mustn’t forget to appreciate what’s good in those who aren’t Impressionists, I didn’t exactly mean to say that I was urging you to admire the Salon beyond measure, but rather a heap of people like, for example, Jourdan, who has just died in Avignon, Antigna, Feyen-Perrin, all those whom we knew so well before, when we were younger, why forget them or why attach no importance to their present-day equivalents? Why are Daubigny and Quost and Jeannin not colourists for example? So many distinctions in Impressionism do not have the importance one wanted to see in them. Crinolines also had something pretty and consequently good about them, but anyway the fashion was fortunately short-lived all the same. Not for some people. And thus we’ll always retain a certain passion for Impressionism, but I sense that I’m returning more and more to the ideas I already had before coming to Paris. Now that you’re married we no longer have to live for great ideas but, believe it, for little ones only. And I find that a real relief which I don’t complain about at all. (In my room I have the famous portrait of a man (the wood engraving) that you know, a mandarin woman by Monorou (the large print from the Bing album), the blade of grass (from the same album), the Pietà21 and the good Samaritan by Delacroix, and Meissonier’s reader, then two large reed pen drawings.)24
   At the moment I’m reading Balzac’s Le médecin de campagne, which is really fine, in it there’s a character of a woman, not mad but too sensitive, who is really charming, I’ll send it to you when I’ve finished it. Wil wrote me a kind letter, still very firm and calm. They have a lot of room here at the hospital, there’d be enough to make studios for thirty or so painters. I really must make up my mind, it’s only too true that an awful lot of painters go mad, it’s a life which makes you very distracted, to say the least. If I throw myself fully into work again, that’s good, but I still remain cracked. If I could enlist for 5 years I would recover considerably and would be more rational and more the master of myself. But one or the other, it’s all the same to me. I hope that in the heap of canvases I’ve sent you there may be some which will end up giving you pleasure. If I remain a painter, then sooner or later I’ll probably see Paris again, and I firmly promise myself that I’ll thoroughly touch up several old canvases on that occasion. What’s Gauguin doing, I’m still avoiding writing to him until I’m completely normal, but I think of him so often, and I’d so much like to know if everything is going relatively well for him. If I hadn’t been in such a hurry, if I’d kept my studio, this summer I would have worked again on all the canvases I’ve sent you. As long as the impasto isn’t dry all the way through, naturally it can’t be scraped. You’ll clearly see that the two women’s expressions26 are different from the expressions one sees in Paris. Is Signac back in Paris yet? My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter. You’re quite right to say that Mr Salles has been perfect in all of this, I’m much obliged to him. I wanted to tell you that I think I’ve done well to come here, first, in seeing the reality of the life of the diverse mad or cracked people in this menagerie, I’m losing the vague dread, the fear of the thing. And little by little I can come to consider madness as being an illness like any other. Then the change of surroundings is doing me good, I imagine. As far as I know the doctor here is inclined to consider what I’ve had as an attack of an epileptic nature. But I haven’t made any enquiries. Have you by chance yet received the crate of paintings, I’m curious to know if they’ve suffered more, yes or no. I have two others on the go — violet irises4 and a lilac bush. Two subjects taken from the garden. The idea of my duty to work comes back to me a lot, and I believe that all my faculties for work will come back to me quite quickly. It’s just that work often absorbs me so much that I think I’ll always be absent-minded and awkward in getting by for the rest of life too. I won’t write you a long letter — I’ll try to answer the letter from my new sister, which greatly touched me, but I don’t know if I’ll manage to do it. Handshake, and ever yours, Vincent 
   My dear sister, Thanks very much for your letter, in which I above all looked for news of my brother. And I find it very good. I can see that you have already observed that he loves Paris and that this surprises you a little, you who don’t like it, or rather who above all like the flowers there, such as, I suppose, for example, the wisterias which are probably beginning to flower. Could it not be the case that in liking a thing one sees it better and more accurately than in not liking it. For him and for me Paris is certainly already a cemetery in a way, where many artists have perished, whom we knew directly or indirectly. Certainly Millet, whom you’ll learn to like a lot, and with him many others, have tried to get out of Paris. But Eugène Delacroix, for example, it’s difficult to portray him ‘as a man’ other than as a Parisian. All this to urge you — with all caution, admittedly — to believe in the possibility that there are homes in Paris, and not just apartments. 
   Anyway — fortunately you are now his home yourself. It’s quite odd perhaps that the result of this terrible attack7 is that in my mind there’s hardly any really clear desire or hope left, and I’m wondering if it is thus that one thinks when, with the passions somewhat extinguished, one comes down the mountain instead of climbing it. Anyway my sister, if you can believe, or almost, that everything is always for the best in the best of worlds8 then you’ll also be able to believe, perhaps, that Paris is the best of the towns in it. Have you noticed yet that the old cab-horses there have big, beautiful heartbroken eyes, like Christians sometimes. Whatever the case, we’re not savages nor peasants, and we perhaps even have a duty to love civilization (so-called). Anyway, it would probably be hypocritical to say or believe that Paris is bad when one lives there. The first time one sees Paris it may be, besides, that everything there seems against nature, dirty and sad. Anyway, if you don’t like Paris, above all do not like painting nor those who directly or indirectly are engaged in it, for it’s only too doubtful whether that’s beautiful or useful. But what can you do, there are people who love nature while being cracked or ill, those are the painters, then there are some who love what is done by the hand of man, and those even go as far as liking paintings. 
   Although there are a few people here who are seriously ill, the fear, the horror that I had of madness before has already been greatly softened. And although one continually hears shouts and terrible howls as though of the animals in a menagerie, despite this the people here know each other very well, and help each other when they suffer crises. They all come to see when I’m working in the garden, and I can assure you are more discreet and more polite to leave me in peace than, for example, the good citizens of Arles. It’s possible that I’ll stay here for quite a long time, never have I been so tranquil as here and at the hospital in Arles to be able to paint a little at last. Very near here there are some little grey or blue mountains, with very, very green wheatfields at their foot, and pines. I shall count myself very happy if I manage to work enough to earn my living, for it makes me very worried when I tell myself that I’ve done so many paintings and drawings without ever selling any. Don’t be in too much of a hurry to consider this an injustice, I don’t know anything at all about it. Thanking you again for writing to me, and being very happy to know that now my brother doesn’t return to an empty apartment when he comes home in the evening, I shake your hand in thought, and believe me your brother Vincent My dear Theo, Your letter which I’ve just received gives me great pleasure. You tell me that J.H. Weissenbruch has two paintings in the exhibition — but I thought he was dead — am I mistaken? He certainly is one hell of an artist and a good man, with a big heart too. What you say about the Berceuse gives me pleasure;3 it’s very true that the common people, who buy themselves chromos and listen with sentimentality to barrel organs, are vaguely in the right and perhaps more sincere than certain men-about-town who go to the Salon. Gauguin, if he’ll accept it, you shall give him a version of the Berceuse that wasn’t mounted on a stretching frame, and to Bernard too, as a token of friendship. But if Gauguin wants sunflowers it’s only absolutely fair that he gives you something that you like as much in exchange. Gauguin himself above all liked the sunflowers later, when he had seen them for a long time. You must know, too, that if you put them in this order:  that is, the Berceuse in the middle and the two canvases of the sunflowers to the right and the left, this forms a sort of triptych. And then the yellow and orange tones of the head take on more brilliance through the proximity of the yellow shutters. And then you will understand that what I was writing to you about it, that my idea had been to make a decoration like one for the far end of a cabin on a ship, for example. Then as the size gets bigger, the summary execution gets its raison d’être. The middle frame is then the red one. And the two sunflowers that go with it are those surrounded by strips of wood. You see that this framing of simple laths does quite well, and a frame like that costs only very little. It would be perhaps good to frame the green and red vineyards, the sower9 and the furrows10 and the interior of the bedroom11 with them too. 
    Here’s a new no. 30 canvas, commonplace again, like one of those chromos from a penny bazaar that depict eternal nests of greenery for lovers. Thick tree-trunks covered with ivy, the ground also covered with ivy and periwinkle, a stone bench and a bush of roses, blanched in the cold shadow. In the foreground a few plants with white calyxes. It’s green, violet and pink. It’s just a question — which is unfortunately lacking in chromos from a penny bazaar and barrel organs — of putting in some style. Since I’ve been here, the neglected garden planted with tall pines under which grows tall and badly tended grass intermingled with various weeds, has provided me with enough work, and I haven’t yet gone outside. However, the landscape of St-Rémy is very beautiful, and little by little I’m probably going to make trips into it. But staying here as I am, the doctor14 has naturally been in a better position to see what was wrong, and will, I dare hope, be more reassured that he can let me paint. I assure you that I’m very well here, and that for the time being I see no reason at all to come and board in Paris or its surroundings. I have a little room with grey-green paper with two water-green curtains with designs of very pale roses enlivened with thin lines of blood-red. These curtains, probably the leftovers of a ruined, deceased rich man, are very pretty in design. Probably from the same source comes a very worn armchair covered with a tapestry flecked in the manner of a Diaz or a Monticelli, red-brown, pink, creamy white, black, forget-me-not blue and bottle green. Through the iron-barred window I can make out a square of wheat in an enclosure, a perspective in the manner of Van Goyen, above which in the morning I see the sun rise in its glory. 
   With this — as there are more than 30 empty rooms — I have another room in which to work. The food is so-so. It smells naturally a little musty, as in a cockroach-ridden restaurant in Paris or a boarding school. As these unfortunates do absolutely nothing (not a book, nothing to distract them but a game of boules and a game of draughts) they have no other daily distraction than to stuff themselves with chickpeas, haricot beans, lentils and other groceries and colonial foodstuffs by the regulated quantities and at fixed times. As the digestion of these commodities presents certain difficulties, they thus fill their days in a manner as inoffensive as it’s cheap. But joking apart, the fear of madness passes from me considerably upon seeing from close at hand those who are affected with it, as I may very easily be in the future. Before I had some repulsion for these beings, and it was something distressing for me to have to reflect that so many people of our profession, Troyon, Marchal, Meryon, Jundt, M. Maris, Monticelli, a host of others, had ended up like that. I wasn’t even able to picture them in the least in that state. Well, now I think of all this without fear, i.e. I find it no more atrocious than if these people had snuffed it of something else, of consumption or syphilis, for example. These artists, I see them take on their serene bearing again, and do you think it’s a small thing to rediscover ancient members of the profession. Joking apart, that’s what I’m profoundly grateful for. For although there are some who howl or usually rave, here there is much true friendship that they have for each other. They say, one must suffer others for the others to suffer us, and other very true reasonings that they thus put into practice. And between ourselves we understand each other very well, I can, for example, chat sometimes with one who doesn’t reply except in incoherent sounds, because he isn’t afraid of me.
   If someone has some crisis the others look after him, and intervene so that he doesn’t harm himself. The same for those who have the mania of often getting angry. Old regulars of the menagerie run up and separate the fighters, if there is a fight. It’s true that there are some who are in a more serious condition, whether they be filthy, or dangerous. These are in another courtyard. Now I take a bath twice a week, and stay in it for 2 hours, then my stomach is infinitely better than a year ago, so I only have to continue, as far as I know. I think I’ll spend less here than elsewhere, since here I still have work on my plate, for nature is beautiful. My hope would be that at the end of a year I’ll know better than now what I can do and what I want. Then, little by little, an idea will come to me for beginning again. Coming back to Paris or anywhere at the moment doesn’t appeal to me at all, I feel that I’m in the right place here. In my opinion, what most of those who have been here for years are suffering from is an extreme sluggishness. Now, my work will preserve me from that to a certain extent. The room where we stay on rainy days is like a 3rd-class waiting room in some stagnant village, all the more so since there are honourable madmen who always wear a hat, spectacles and travelling clothes and carry a cane, almost like at the seaside, and who represent the passengers there. I’m obliged to ask you for some more colours, and especially some canvas. When I send you the 4 canvases of the garden25 I have on the go you’ll see that, considering that life happens above all in the garden, it isn’t so sad. Yesterday I drew a very large, rather rare night moth there which is called the death’s head, its coloration astonishingly distinguished: black, grey, white, shaded, and with glints of carmine or vaguely tending towards olive green; it’s very big.  To paint it I would have had to kill it, and that would have been a shame since the animal was so beautiful. I’ll send you the drawing of it with a few other drawings of plants. You could take the canvases which are dry enough at Tanguy’s or at your place off the stretching frames and then put the new ones you consider worthy of it onto these stretching frames. Gauguin must be able to give you the address of a liner for the Bedroom who won’t be expensive. This I imagine must be a 5-franc restoration, if it’s more then don’t have it done, I don’t think that Gauguin paid more when he quite often had canvases of his own, Cézanne or Pissarro lined. Speaking of my condition, I’m still so grateful for yet another thing. I observe in others that, like me, they too have heard sounds and strange voices during their crises, that things also appeared to change before their eyes. And that softens the horror that I retained at first of the crisis I had, and which when it comes to you unexpectedly, cannot but frighten you beyond measure. Once one knows that it’s part of the illness one takes it like other things. Had I not seen other mad people at close hand I wouldn’t have been able to rid myself of thinking about it all the time. For the sufferings of anguish aren’t funny when you’re caught in a crisis. Most epileptics bite their tongues and injure them. Rey told me that he had known a case where someone had injured his ear as I did, and I believe I’ve heard a doctor here who came to see me with the director say that he too had seen it before. I dare to believe that once one knows what it is, once one is aware of one’s state and of possibly being subject to crises, that then one can do something about it oneself so as not to be caught so much unawares by the anguish or the terror. Now, this has been diminishing for 5 months, I have good hope of getting over it, or at least of not having crises of such force. There’s one person here who has been shouting and always talking, like me, for a fortnight, he thinks he hears voices and words in the echo of the corridors, probably because the auditory nerve is sick and too sensitive, and with me it was both the sight and the hearing at the same time which, according to what Rey said one day, is usual at the beginning of epilepsy.   Now the shock had been such that it disgusted me even to move, and nothing would have been so agreeable to me as never to wake up again. At present this horror of life is already less pronounced, and the melancholy less acute. But I still have absolutely no will, hardly any desires or none, and everything that has to do with ordinary life, the desire for example to see friends again, about whom I think however, almost nil. That’s why I’m not yet at the point where I ought to leave here soon, I would still have melancholy for everything. And it’s even only in these very last days that the repulsion for life has changed quite radically. There’s still a way to go from there to will and action. It’s a shame that you yourself are still condemned to Paris, and that you never see the countryside other than that around Paris. I think that it’s no more unfortunate for me to be in the company where I am than for you always the fateful things at Goupil & Cie. From that point of view we’re quite equal. For only in part can you act in accordance with your ideas. Since, however, we have once got used to these inconveniences, it becomes second nature. I think that although the paintings cost canvas, paint &c., at the end of the month, however, it’s more advantageous to spend a little more thus, and to make them with what I’ve learned in total, than to abandon them while one would have to pay for board and lodging all the same anyway. And that’s why I’m making them. So this month I have 4 no. 30 canvases and two or three drawings. But no matter what one does, the question of money is always there like the enemy before the troops, and one can’t deny it or forget it. 
   I retain my duties in that respect as much as anyone. And perhaps some day I’ll be in a position to repay all that I’ve spent, because I consider that what I’ve spent is, if not taken from you at least taken from the family, so consequently I’ve produced paintings and I’ll do more. That is to act as you too act yourself. If I had private means, perhaps my mind would be freer to do art for art’s sake, now I content myself with believing that in working assiduously even so, without thinking of it one perhaps makes some progress. Here are the colours I would need 


3 
emerald green

large tubes.


2
cobalt


1
ultramarine


1
orange lead


6
zinc white


5
metres canvas
 
 


 Thanking you for your kind letter, I shake your hand warmly, as well as your wife’s. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, I still have to ask you to send me a few ordinary brushes as soon as possible, of more or less these sizes  Half a dozen of each please. I hope that you’re well and your wife too, and that you’ll enjoy a little of the good weather. At least here we have splendid sunshine. As for me, my health is good, and as for the head it will, let’s hope, be a matter of time and patience. The director had a few words with me to say that he’d received a letter from you, and that he’d written to you. To me he says nothing and I ask nothing of him, which is simplest. He’s a little gouty man — widowed a few years ago — who has very dark spectacles. As the establishment is a little moribund, the man appears to take only a rather half-hearted enjoyment in this profession, and besides there’s reason enough for it. A new person has arrived who is so agitated that he breaks everything and shouts day and night, he also tears the straitjackets and up to now he scarcely calms down, although he’s in a bath all day long, he demolishes his bed and all the rest in his room, overturns his food &c. It’s very sad to see — but they have a lot of patience here and will eventually get there, however.
   New things become old so quickly — I think that if I came to Paris in the state of mind I’m currently in, I wouldn’t make any distinction between a so-called dark painting or a bright Impressionist painting, between a varnished painting in oils and a matt picture done with thinned paint. I mean by this that having reflected as time passed — I believe more than ever in the eternal youth of the school of Delacroix, Millet, Rousseau, Dupré, Daubigny, just as much as in the current one or even in artists to come. I scarcely believe that Impressionism will ever do more than the Romantics, for example. It’s certainly a far cry between that and admiring people like Léon Glaize or Perrault. This morning I saw the countryside from my window a long time before sunrise with nothing but the morning star, which looked very big. Daubigny and Rousseau did that, though, with the expression of all the intimacy and all the great peace and majesty that it has, adding to it a feeling so heartbreaking, so personal. These emotions I do not detest. I still have remorse, and enormously when I think of my work, so little in harmony with what I’d have wished to do. I hope that in the long run it will make me do better things, but we aren’t there yet. I think that you would do well to wash the canvases that are quite quite dry with water and a little spirits of wine to remove the oil and the thinner from the impasto. The same for the night café6 and the green vineyard, and above all for the landscape that was in the walnut frame. The night9 also (but that one has recent retouchings which might run with the spirits of wine).
   I’ve been here almost a whole month, not one single time have I had the slightest desire to be elsewhere; just the will to work again is becoming a tiny bit firmer. I don’t notice any very clear desire to be elsewhere in the others either, and this may very well come from the fact that one feels too decidedly broken for life outside. What I don’t really understand is their absolute idleness. But that’s the great defect of the south, and its ruin. But what a beautiful land and what beautiful blue and what a sun. And yet I’ve only seen the garden and what I can make out through the window. Have you read the new book by Guy de Maupassant, Fort comme la mort, what is its subject? What I read last in this category was Zola’s Le rêve, I found the figure of the woman, the embroiderer, very, very beautiful, and the description of the embroidery all in gold. Precisely because it’s like a question of colour, different yellows, whole and broken. But the figure of the man struck me as rather lifeless, and the great cathedral also made me as melancholy as hell. Only that lilac and dark blue repoussoir makes, if you will, the blonde figure stand out. But anyway, there are already things by Lamartine like that. I hope that you’ll destroy a heap of things that are too bad in the heap I sent, or at least will only show the most passable ones. As regards the exhibition of the Independents, it’s all the same to me, act as if I wasn’t there at all. To not be indifferent and not exhibit something too mad, perhaps the starry night and the landscape with yellow greenery which was in the walnut frame. Since these are two of contrary colours, 
   and that might give others the idea of doing night effects better than I do. Anyway you must absolutely stop worrying with regard to me now. When I receive the new canvas and the colours13 I’ll go out a bit to see the countryside. Since it’s just the season when there are lots of flowers and thus colour effects, it will perhaps be wise to send me another 5 metres of canvas in addition. For the flowers will be short-lived and will be replaced by the yellow wheatfields. The latter, above all, I would like to capture better than in Arles. The mistral (since there are a few mountains here) appears far less annoying than in Arles, where you always get it at first hand. When you receive the canvases I’ve done in the garden14 you’ll see that I’m not too melancholy here. More soon, good handshake in thought to you and to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for the consignment of canvases, colours, brushes, tobacco and chocolate, which reached me in good order. I was very glad of it, for I was pining for work a little. Also, for a few days now I’ve been going outside to work in the neighbourhood. Your last letter was dated 21 May, if I remember rightly. I’ve had no news of you yet since then, except that Mr Peyron told me he’d received a letter from you. I hope that you’re in good health, and your wife too. Mr Peyron intends to go to Paris to see the exhibition and then pay you a visit. What can I tell you that’s new, not much. I have two landscapes on the go (no. 30 canvases) of views taken in the hills.
   One is the countryside that I glimpse from the window of my bedroom. In the foreground a field of wheat, ravaged and knocked to the ground after a storm. A boundary wall and beyond, grey foliage of a few olive trees, huts and hills. Finally, at the top of the painting a large white and grey cloud swamped by the azure. It’s a landscape of extreme simplicity — in terms of coloration as well. It would be suitable as a pendant to that study of the bedroom that’s damaged. When the thing depicted is stylistically absolutely in agreement and at one with the manner of depiction, isn’t that what creates the quality of a piece of art? That’s why, as regards painting, a household loaf is above all good when it’s painted by Chardin. Now Egyptian art, for example, what makes it extraordinary, is it not that those calm, serene kings, 
   wise and gentle, patient, good, seem unable to be other than they are; eternally farmers who worship the sun. How I’d have liked to see an Egyptian house in the exhibition, built by the architect Jules Garnier – painted in red, yellow and blue with a garden divided regularly into beds by rows of bricks – the dwelling of the people we know only in the state of mummies or in granite. But there you are, to get back to the point, since the Egyptian artists thus have a faith, working from feeling and instinct, they express all these intangible things: goodness, infinite patience, wisdom, serenity, with a few masterly curves and marvellous proportions. That’s to say once more, when the thing depicted and the manner of depicting it are in accord, the thing has style and quality. Thus also the servant girl in Leys’s great fresco, when she’s engraved by Braquemond, becomes a new work of art10 – or Meissonier’s little reader when it’s Jacquemart who engraves him11 – since the manner of engraving and the thing depicted are as one.
   As I want to keep this study of the bedroom, if you would send it back to me when I’m sent canvas, rolled up, I’ll repaint it. Initially I’d wanted to have it lined because I didn’t think I’d be able to do it again. However, as my mind has grown calmer since, I can indeed redo it now. The thing is, among the number of things that one makes there are always some that one has felt or wanted more and which one wants to keep all the same. When I see a painting that intrigues me, I can never help asking myself, ‘in what house, room, corner of the room, in whose home would it do well, would it be in its rightful place’. Thus the paintings of Hals, Rembrandt, Vermeer are only at home in the old Dutch house. Now the Impressionists – once again, if an interior isn’t complete without a work of art, neither is a painting if it isn’t at one with original surroundings, resulting from the era in which it was produced. And I don’t know if the Impressionists are worth more than their time, or rather aren’t yet worth as much. In a word, are there souls and interiors of houses that are more important than what has been expressed by painting, I’m inclined to believe so. 
   I’ve seen an advertisement for a forthcoming exhibition of Impressionists called Gauguin, Bernard, Anquetin and other names. Am therefore inclined to believe that another new sect has been formed, no less infallible than the others that already exist. Was this the exhibition you were talking to me about? What storms in teacups. I’m in good health – so-so, I feel happier with my work here than I could outside. By staying here a fairly long time, I’ll have acquired controlled behaviour, and in the long run the result will be more order in my life and less impressionability. And that would be something gained. Besides, I wouldn’t have the courage to begin again outside. I once went into the village — accompanied, at that. The mere sight of the people and things had an effect on me as if I was going to faint, and I felt very ill. In the face of nature it’s the feeling for work that keeps me going. But anyway, that’s to tell you that there must have been some over-strong emotion inside me that brought that about, and I have no idea what could have caused it.
   I’m bored to death at times after work, and yet I have no desire to begin again. The doctor who has just come by says that he won’t be going to Paris for a few weeks yet, so don’t expect his visit for the time being. I hope that you’ll write to me soon. This month I’ll again really be in need of 

8 
tubes  
silver white 


6
,,
Veronese Green


2
,,
Ultramarine


2
,,
Cobalt


2
 
yellow Ochre


1
 
 red             ,,



1
 
raw sienna


1
 
ivory black14

 It’s funny that every time I try to reason with myself in order to get a clear picture of things – why I came here, and that after all it’s only an accident like any other – a terrible terror and horror seizes me and prevents me from thinking. It’s true that it tends vaguely to diminish, but it also seems to me to prove that there is indeed something, I don’t know what, disturbed in my brain. 
   But it’s astounding to be afraid of nothing like this, and not to be able to remember. Only you can count on the fact that I’m doing everything I can to become active and perhaps useful again, in this sense at least, that I want to do better paintings than before. Many things in the landscape here often recall Ruisdael, but the figure of the ploughman is lacking. In our country one sees men, women, children, animals at work everywhere and at all times of the year, and here not a third of that, and in addition they’re not the honest workers of the north. They seem to work the land in an awkward, lax way, without energy. Perhaps I’ve got hold of the wrong idea here, I hope so at least, since I’m not from round here. But it makes things colder than one would dare think from reading Tartarin, who had perhaps been expelled many years ago with his entire family. Above all write to me soon, for your letter is very slow in coming, I hope that you’re well. It’s a great consolation for me to know that you’re no longer living alone. If one month or another it should be too difficult for you to send me colours, canvas &c., then don’t send them, for believe me it’s better to live than to do art in an absent-minded way. 
   And before everything else, your house must be neither sad nor dismal. That first and painting next. Then I feel tempted to begin again with the simpler colours, the ochres for example. Is a Van Goyen ugly because it’s painted all in oils with very little neutral colour, or a Michel? My undergrowth with ivy is completely finished, I want very much to send it to you immediately, as soon as it’s dry enough to be rolled up. With a really strong handshake to you and your wife. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter of yesterday. I too cannot write as I would wish, but anyway we live in such a disturbed age that there can be no question of having opinions that are firm enough to judge things. I would have very much liked to know if you now still eat together at the restaurant or if you live at home more. I hope so, for in the long run that must be the best. As for me, it’s going well – you’ll understand that after almost half a year now of absolute sobriety in eating, drinking, smoking, with two two-hour baths a week recently, this must clearly calm one down a great deal. So it’s going very well, and as regards work, it occupies and distracts me – which I need very much – far from wearing me out. It gives me great pleasure that Isaäcson found things in my consignment that please him. He and De Haan appear very faithful, which is sufficiently rare these days for it to be worthy of appreciation. And that, as you say, there was another who found something in the yellow and black figure of a woman, that doesn’t surprise me, although I think that its merit lies in the model and not in my painting. I despair of ever finding models. Ah, if I had some from time to time like that one, or like the woman who posed for the Berceuse, I’d do something quite different.
   I think you did the right thing by not exhibiting paintings of mine at the exhibition by Gauguin and others. There’s reason enough for me to abstain from doing so without offending them as long as I’m not cured myself. For me it’s beyond doubt that Gauguin and Bernard have great and real merit. It’s still perfectly understandable, though, that for beings like them, really alive and young, who must live and try to carve out their path, it’s impossible to turn all their canvases to the wall until it pleases people to admit them somewhere in the official pickle. One causes a stir by exhibiting in the cafés, which I don’t say isn’t in bad taste. But for myself, I have that crime on my conscience, and to the point of doing it twice, having exhibited at the Tambourin and at avenue de Clichy. Not counting the disturbance caused to 81 virtuous cannibals of the good town of Arles and to their excellent mayor. So in any case, I am worse and more blameworthy than they are in that regard (causing a stir quite involuntarily, my word). Young Bernard – according to me – has already made a few absolutely astonishing canvases in which there’s a gentleness and something essentially French and candid, of rare quality. Anyway, neither he nor Gauguin are artists who could look as if they were trying to go to the World Exhibition by the back stairs. You can be sure of that. It’s understandable that they couldn’t keep silent. That the Impressionists’ movement has had no unity is what proves that they’re less skilled fighters than other artists like Delacroix and Courbet. At last I have a landscape with olive trees, and also a new study of a starry sky. Although I haven’t seen the latest canvases either by Gauguin or Bernard, I’m fairly sure that these two studies I speak of are comparable in sentiment. When you’ve seen these two studies for a while, as well as the one of the ivy, I’ll perhaps be able to give you, better than in words, 
   an idea of the things Gauguin, Bernard and I sometimes chatted about and that preoccupied us. It’s not a return to the romantic or to religious ideas, no. However, by going the way of Delacroix, more than it seems, by colour and a more determined drawing than trompe-l’oeil precision, one might express a country nature that is purer than the suburbs, the bars of Paris. One might try to paint human beings who are also more serene and purer than Daumier had before him. But of course following Daumier in the drawing of it. We’ll leave aside whether that exists or doesn’t exist, but we believe that nature extends beyond St-Ouen. Perhaps, while reading Zola, we are moved by the sound of the pure French of Renan, for example. And after all, while Le Chat Noir draws women for us after its own fashion, and above all Forain does so in a masterly way, we do some of our own, less Parisian but no less fond of Paris and its elegances, we try to prove that something else quite different exists. Gauguin, Bernard or I will all remain there perhaps, and won’t overcome but neither will we be overcome. We’re perhaps not there for one thing or the other, being there to console or to prepare for more consolatory painting. Isaäcson and De Haan may not succeed either, but in Holland they’ve felt the need to state that Rembrandt did great painting and not trompe l’oeil, they also felt something different. If you can get the Bedroom13 lined it’s better to have it done before sending it to me. I have no more white at all at all.
   You’ll give me a lot of pleasure if you write to me again soon. I so often think that after a while you’ll find in marriage, I hope, the means to gain new strength, and that a year from now your health will have improved. What I’d very much like to have here to read from time to time would be a Shakespeare. There’s one priced at one shilling, Dicks' Shilling Shakespeare, which is complete. There’s no shortage of editions, and I think the cheap ones have been changed less than the more expensive ones. In any case I wouldn’t want one that cost more than three francs. Now, whatever is too bad in the consignment, put it completely to one side, pointless to have stuff like that; it may be of use to me later to remind me of things. Whatever is good will show up better by being part of a smaller number of canvases. The rest, if you put them in a corner, flat between two sheets of cardboard with old newspapers between the studies, that’s all they’re worth. I’m sending you a roll of drawings. Handshakes to you, to Jo and to our friends. Ever yours, Vincent The drawings Hospital in Arles, the weeping tree in the grass, the fields and the olive trees, are a continuation of those from Montmajour from back then. The others are hasty studies done in the garden. There’s no hurry for the Shakespeare, if they don’t have an edition like that, it won’t take an eternity to have one sent. Don’t be afraid that I would ever venture onto dizzy heights of my own free will, unfortunately, whether we like it or not, we’re subject to circumstances and to the illnesses of our time. But with all the precautions I’m now taking, it will be difficult for me to relapse, and I hope that the attacks won’t start again. My dear Theo, Enclosed you’ll find an order for colours to replace the one in my previous letter. We’ve had some fine hot days and I’ve got some more canvases on the go, so that there are 12 no. 30 canvases on the stocks. Two studies of cypresses of that difficult shade of bottle green. I’ve worked their foregrounds with thick impastos of white lead which gives firmness to the ground. I believe that Monticellis were very often prepared in this way. One then places other colours on top. But I don’t know if the canvases are strong enough for this work. Speaking of Gauguin, Bernard and the fact that they might well do more consolatory painting, I must, however, add what I’ve anyway often said to Gauguin himself, that one must then not forget that others have already done so. But whatever the case, outside Paris one quickly forgets Paris, by throwing oneself into the heart of the country one changes one’s ideas. But I for one couldn’t forget all those beautiful Barbizon canvases then, and it seems unlikely and anyway unnecessary to do better than that. What’s Andries Bonger doing, you don’t mention him in your last two or three letters. As for me, my health is still very good. And work is distracting me. I have received, from one of our sisters probably, a book by Rod which is not bad but whose title, Le sens de la vie, is really a little pretentious for the contents, it would appear to me. Above all it’s not very cheering. The author, it seems to me, must have a lot of trouble with his lungs. And consequently a little with everything.
   Anyway, he admits that he finds solace in the company of his wife, which is very well observed, but anyway, for my own use he teaches me absolutely nothing whatsoever about the meaning of life. For my part I could find him a little trite and be surprised that in these days he has had a book like that printed and that he’s selling it for 3 francs 50. Anyway, I prefer Alphonse Karr, Souvestre, Droz, because it’s a bit more alive than this. It’s true that I’m perhaps ungrateful, not even appreciating Abbé Constantin and other literary productions that illuminate the sweet reign of the naїve Carnot. It appears that this book has made a great impression on our good sisters. Wil had moreover spoken to me of it, but the little women and books are two different things. I’ve re-read Voltaire’s Zadig ou la destinée with much pleasure. It’s like Candide. There, at least, the powerful author makes one glimpse that it’s still possible that life has a meaning, ‘although one agreed in conversation that the things of this world did not always go according to the wisest people’s liking’. As for me, I don’t know what to wish for, first of all working here or elsewhere appears to me more or less the same thing, and since I’m here, staying here the most simple. Only there’s a lack of news to write to you, for the days are all the same, as for ideas I have no others except to think that a wheatfield or a cypress are well worth the effort of looking at them from close at hand, and so on.
   I have a wheatfield, very yellow and very bright, perhaps the brightest canvas I’ve done. The cypresses still preoccupy me, I’d like to do something with them like the canvases of the sunflowers9 because it astonishes me that no one has yet done them as I see them. It’s beautiful as regards lines and proportions, like an Egyptian obelisk. And the green has such a distinguished quality. It’s the dark patch10 in a sun-drenched landscape, but it’s one of the most interesting dark notes, the most difficult to hit off exactly that I can imagine. Now they must be seen here against the blue, in the blue, rather. To do nature here, as everywhere, one must really be here for a long time. Thus a Montenard doesn’t give me the true and intimate note, for the light is mysterious, and Monticelli and Delacroix felt that. Then Pissarro used to talk about it very well in the old days, and I’m still a long way from being able to do as he said one should. Naturally it will please me if you send me the colours, soon if that’s possible, but above all do what you can without it exhausting you too much. So if you prefer to send me it in two batches, that’s also all right.  I think that of the two canvases of cypresses, the one I’m making the croquis of will be the best. The trees in it are very tall and massive. The foreground very low, brambles and undergrowth. Behind, violet hills, a green and pink sky with a crescent moon. The foreground, above all, is thickly impasted, tufts of bramble with yellow, violet, green highlights. I’ll send you drawings of them with two other drawings that I’ve also done.
   That will keep me busy for the next few days. Finding something to do all day is the big thing here. What a pity that one can’t move the building here. It would be magnificent to hold an exhibition there, all the empty rooms, the big corridors. I’d very much have liked to see that Rembrandt painting you spoke about in your last letter. In the old days I saw in Braun’s window a photo after a painting which must be from the fine late period (probably in the Hermitage series), in it there were large figures of angels, it was Abraham’s meal. 5 figures I think. That too was extraordinary. As touching as The pilgrims at Emmaus, for example. If ever there were a question of giving something to Mr Salles for the trouble he has gone to – later one should give him Rembrandt’s Pilgrims. Is your health good? Handshake to you and your wife, I hope to send you new drawings next week. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Enclosed I’m sending you a letter from Mother, naturally you know all the news it contains. I think it’s very logical of Cor to go there. What is different there from staying in Europe is that down there one doesn’t have to undergo the influence of our large cities, as one does here, so old that everything in them seems to be in its dotage and tottering. So instead of seeing one’s vital forces and natural, native energy evaporate in circumlocution, it’s possible that one might be happier far from our society. Even if it were otherwise, the fact remains that it’s to act uprightly and in accordance with his upbringing for him not to hesitate to accept this position. So now it isn’t to tell you all this news that you know that I’m sending you the letter. But it’s for you to observe in it a little how remarkably firm and regular the writing is when one thinks that it’s true what she says, that she’s ‘a mother approaching 70’. And as you’ve already written to me, and our sister has too, that she seems to have got younger, I see it myself from this very clear writing and in her tighter logic in what she writes, and the simplicity with which she appreciates facts. I believe now that this rejuvenation has obviously come to her from the fact that she’s happy that you’ve got married, which she’d wanted for so long; and I congratulate you that your marriage can give you and Jo the rather rare pleasure of seeing your mother growing young again. It’s really for that that I’m sending you this letter. Because, my dear brother, it’s sometimes necessary later to remember – and it’s so timely that, at the very moment when she’ll have the great pain of being separated from Cor – and it will be hard on her, that – she should be consoled by knowing that you’re married. If the thing were possible you shouldn’t wait fully a whole year before returning to Holland, for she’ll be longing to see you again, you and your wife. At the same time, having married a Dutchwoman, that could in a few years, sooner or later, warm up business relations with Amsterdam or The Hague again. Anyway, once again I haven’t seen a letter from Mother indicating so much inner serenity and calm contentment as this one – not for many years. And I’m sure that this comes from your marriage. It’s said that pleasing one’s parents brings a long life.
   I now thank you very much for the consignment of colours, deduct them from the order placed since, but if it’s at all possible, not for the quantity of white. I thank you also very cordially for the Shakespeare. It will help me not to forget the little English I know – but above all it’s so beautiful. I’ve begun to read the series I know the least well, which before, being distracted by something else or not having the time it was impossible for me to read, the series of the kings. I’ve already read Richard II, Henry IV and half of Henry V. I read without reflecting on whether the ideas of the people of that time are the same as ours, or what becomes of them when one places them face to face with republican or socialist beliefs &c. But what touches me in it, as in the work of certain novelists of our time, is that the voices of these people, which in Shakespeare’s case reach us from a distance of several centuries, don’t appear unknown to us. It’s so alive that one thinks one knows them and sees it. So what Rembrandt alone, or almost alone, has among painters, that tenderness in the gazes of human beings we see either in the Pilgrims at Emmaus, or in the Jewish bride, or in some strange figure of an angel as in the painting you had the good fortune to see9 – that heartbroken tenderness, that glimpse of a superhuman infinite which appears so natural then, one encounters it in many places in Shakespeare. And then serious or gay portraits like the Six, like the traveller, like the Saskia, it’s above all full of that. What a good idea Victor Hugo’s son had of translating all of it into French so that it’s thus within the reach of all. When I think of the Impressionists and of all these present-day questions of art, how many lessons there are precisely for us in there. So from what I’ve just read the idea comes to me that the Impressionists are right a thousand times over. Yet even they must think about it for a long time and always. If it follows from that that they have the right or the duty to do themselves justice, 
   and if they dare call themselves primitives, certainly they’d do well to learn to be primitive as people a little, too, before pronouncing the word primitive like a title that would give them rights to whatsoever. But those who would be the cause of the Impressionists being unhappy, well naturally the case for them is serious, also when they make light of it. And then it would appear that waging a battle seven times a week couldn’t go on. It’s amazing, though, how L’abbesse de Jouarre, when you think of it, holds its own even beside Shakespeare. I think that Renan treated himself to that in order to be able to say beautiful words for once in full and at his ease, because these are beautiful words. So that you may have an idea of what I have on the go I’m sending you ten or so drawings today, all after canvases on the go. The latest one begun is the wheatfield where there’s a little reaper and a big sun. The canvas is all yellow with the exception of the wall and the bottom of purplish hills. The canvas with almost the same subject differs in coloration, being a greyish green and a white and blue sky. How I think of Reid as I read Shakespeare, and how I’ve thought of him several times when I was iller than at present. Finding that I’d been infinitely too harsh and perhaps discouraging towards him in claiming that it was better to love painters than paintings. It isn’t up to me to make distinctions like that, not even when faced with the problem that we see our living friends suffering so much from the lack of enough money to feed themselves and pay for their colours, and on the other hand the high prices that are paid for the canvases of dead painters. In a newspaper I was reading a letter from a collector of Greek objects to one of his friends, which contained this phrase ‘you who love nature, I who love all that the hand of man has made, this difference in our tastes deep down creates the unity in it’. And I found that better than my reasoning.
   I have a canvas of cypresses with a few ears of wheat, poppies, a blue sky, which is like a multicoloured Scottish plaid. This one, which is impasted like the Monticellis, and the wheatfield with the sun that represents extreme heat, also thickly impasted, I think that this would explain to him more or less, however, that he couldn’t lose much by being our friend. But that’s true on our side too, and precisely because we were perhaps right to disapprove of his method we ought on our side to take a step towards reconciliation. Anyway, I daren’t yet write now for fear of saying too many foolish things, but when I’m more certain of my pen I’d very much like to write to him one day. It’s the same for other friends, but I really have told myself that I should wait as long as possible before being able, even in the best of circumstances, to arrive at this ‘being a little more certain of myself’. I still have canvases in Arles that weren’t dry when I left, I very much want to go and get them one of these days in order to send them to you. There are half a dozen of them. The drawings appear to me to have little colour this time, and this is very probably due to the over-smooth paper. Anyway, the Weeping tree25 and the Courtyard of the hospital at Arles26 are more coloured, but that though will give you an idea of what I have on the go. The canvas of the reaper will become something like the Sower of the other year. As later the books of Zola will remain beautiful precisely because they have life. What also has life is the fact that Mother is happy that you’re married, and I think that this cannot be disagreeable to yourselves, you and Jo. But the separation from Cor will be so hard for her that it’s difficult to imagine. It is precisely in learning to suffer without complaining, learning to consider pain without repugnance, that one risks vertigo a little; and yet it might be possible, yet one glimpses even a vague probability that on the other side of life we’ll glimpse justifications for pain, which seen from here sometimes takes up the whole horizon so much that it takes on the despairing proportions of a deluge. Of that we know very little, of proportions, and it’s better to look at a wheatfield, even in the state of a painting. I shake your hands firmly and will have news of you soon I hope. Good health to you both. Ever yours, Vincent Dear brother and sister. Jo’s letter1 tells me a very great piece of news this morning, I congratulate you on it, and am very pleased to hear it. I was very touched by your reasoning when you say that as neither of you are in as good health as appears desirable on an occasion like this, you had a kind of doubt, and in any case a feeling of pity for the child to come traversed your soul. This child in this case, has it, even before its birth, been less well loved than the child of very healthy parents, whose first impulse would have been a keen joy? Surely not. We know so little about life that we’re not really in a position to judge between good and bad, just or unjust, and to say that one is unhappy because one suffers hasn’t been proved. You should know that Roulin’s child came to them smiling and very healthy, while the parents were at bay. So take it as it is, wait with confidence and possess your soul with a long patience as an old saying has it, and with good will. Let nature take its course. As to what you say about Theo’s health, my dear sister, while sharing your anxieties with all my heart I must nevertheless reassure you, precisely because I’ve seen that his health is changeable and uneven rather than weak, as is mine, for that matter.
   I very much like to believe that illnesses sometimes cure us, i.e. that when the illness comes to a crisis it’s a thing necessary to the recovery of a normal state of body. No, subsequent to the marriage he’ll regain his strength, still having the reserve of youth and power to restore him. I’m very pleased that he’s no longer alone, and truly I don’t doubt that he’ll regain his former temperament after a while. And then above all when he’s a father and the feeling of fatherhood comes to him, that will be a considerable gain. In my life as a painter, and above all when I’m in the country, it’s not so difficult for me to be alone, because in the country one feels the bonds that unite us all more easily. But in town, as he has done his ten consecutive years with the Goupils in Paris, it isn’t possible to live alone. So with patience it will return. I’m going to Arles tomorrow to fetch the canvases that are still over there, which I’ll send you shortly. And I’m going to send you some as soon as possible to try to give you peasant thoughts, even though you’re in town. This morning I talked a little with the doctor here5 – he told me – which was absolutely what I had already thought – that one must wait a year before believing oneself to be cured, since the smallest thing could bring on another attack.
   Then he offered to take my furniture here so that we don’t have double expenses. Tomorrow I’ll go and talk about that in Arles with Mr Salles. When I came here I left 50 francs with Mr Salles to settle up with the hospital in Arles, he’ll certainly have some over. But having again quite often needed various things, the surplus that Mr Peyron had here is exhausted. I’m a little surprised myself that in living with the greatest possible sobriety and regularity for the last 6 months, without having my independent studio, I’m not spending less or producing more than the previous, relatively less sober year. And inwardly I feel neither more nor less remorse &c. if you like. Suffice to say that everything one calls good and bad is however quite relative, it seems to me. I live soberly here because I have the opportunity to. I drank before because I no longer knew how to do otherwise. Anyway it’s all the same to me!!! Sobriety, very calculated it’s true, nevertheless leads to a state of being in which thought, if you have any, flows more easily. Anyway it’s a difference like painting grey or coloured. I’m in fact going to paint more greyly. Only instead of paying money to a landlord we’re giving it to the asylum, I don’t see the difference – and it’s scarcely cheaper. The work is a thing apart, and has always cost me a lot. I thank you very much for the consignment of colours and canvas, which I’m very pleased with. I hope to go and redo the olive trees. There are unfortunately very few vineyards here. My health is good, though, and I have a feeling quite similar to the one I had when I was much younger, when I was also very sober, too much so, I believe they used to say. But it’s all the same, I’ll try to get by.
   As regards being godfather to a son of yours, while first of all it could be a girl, truly, in the circumstances I would prefer to wait until I’m no longer here. Then Mother would certainly set her heart a little on him being called after our father, I for one would find that more logical in the circumstances. I enjoyed myself very much yesterday reading Measure for measure. Then I read Henry VIII, in which there are such beautiful passages, like the one about Buckingham, and Wolsey’s words after his downfall. I think I’m lucky to be able to read or re-read this at my leisure, and then I very much hope to read Homer at last. Outside the cicadas are singing fit to burst, a strident cry ten times louder than that of the crickets, and the scorched grass is taking on beautiful tones of old gold. And the beautiful towns of the south are in the state of our dead towns along the Zuiderzee, which were formerly lively. While in the downfall and the decline of things, the cicadas dear to good old Socrates have remained. And here, certainly, they’re still singing old Greek. If our friend Isaäcson heard them, his face would light up. What Jo writes about you always eating at home, that’s perfect. Anyway, I think that’s going very well, and once again, while sharing with all my heart all possible worries about Theo’s health, within me the hope predominates that in this case a more or less sickly condition is only the result of the efforts of nature to right itself. Patience. Mauve always claimed that nature was good, and even a lot more than one usually thought. Is there anything in his past that proves that he was wrong. His fits of melancholy in his last days, do you think? I myself would be inclined to believe otherwise. More soon, but I wanted to write to you straightaway that this morning’s news gives me great pleasure. Handshakes and Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Tomorrow I’ll send you a roll of canvases by goods train. There are four of them, i.e. the following 

1 
View of Arles, orchards in blossom1


2 
The ivy2


3 
The lilacs3


4 
Pink chestnut trees in the botanical gardens in Arles4


 which will hold their own with the ones you already have, such as the red and green Vineyard, The garden, The harvest, The starry sky. I’m also enclosing another 7 studies which are dry but which are studies after nature rather than subjects for paintings. And that’s how it always is, you have to do several of them before you find a whole with character. Now here are the subjects of these 7 studies. The irises9 – View of the asylum at St-Rémy, no. 30 canvases. Peach trees in blossom (Arles), Meadows (Arles), Olive trees (St-Rémy), Old willows (Arles), Orchard in blossom. Now the next consignment, which will follow shortly, will consist mainly of wheatfields and olive groves. As you can see, I’ve been to Arles to fetch these canvases. The orderly from here16 accompanied me. We went to Mr Salles’s house, who had gone away on holiday for two months, then to the hospital to see Mr Rey, whom I didn’t find either. So we spent the day with my former neighbours, as well as my charwoman from those days18 and a few others.
   One becomes very attached to people one has seen while ill, and it did me a world of good to see some people again who were kind and indulgent towards me then. Someone told me that Mr Rey had taken an examination and had been to Paris, but the porter at the hospital said he didn’t know. I’m curious to know if you might have seen him, for he had planned to go and see the exhibition and then pay you a visit. The doctor from here20 will perhaps not go to Paris, he suffers a great deal from his gout. I’ve also received the second consignment of canvases and colours, and I thank you very much for them. The latest canvas I’ve done is a view of mountains with a darkish hut among olive trees at the bottom. I imagine that you’ll be very absorbed by thoughts of the child to come, I’m very pleased that this should be so, with time I dare believe that you’ll thus find much inner serenity. The fact that one takes on a kind of second nature in Paris, that moreover preoccupations with business and art make one less strong than the peasants, doesn’t prevent one, through the bonds of having wife and child, from reattaching oneself all the same to that 
   simpler and truer nature whose ideal sometimes haunts us. What a business, that Secrétan sale. It always pleases me that the Millets are holding their own. But how I would like to see more good reproductions of Millet. So that it can reach the common folk. The body of work is above all sublime considered as a whole, and it will become more and more difficult to form an idea of it when the paintings are dispersed. I’m sorry not to be able to add the Wheatfield with the reaper24 to this consignment. Write me a line soon. Handshake to you and Jo. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, If I’m writing to you again today it’s because I’m enclosing a few words that I’ve written to our friend Gauguin, feeling sufficient calm return to me these last few days for my letter not to be absolutely absurd, it seemed to me. Besides, there’s no proof that by over-refining one’s scruples of respect or feeling one thereby gains respectfulness or good sense. That being so, it does me good to talk with the pals again, even if at a distance. And you – my dear fellow – how are things, and so write me a few words one of these days – for I can imagine that the emotions which must move the forthcoming father of a family, emotions of which our good father so loved to speak, must be great and of sterling worth in you, as in him, but for the moment are almost impossible for you to express in the rather incoherent mixture of the petty vexations of Paris. Realities of this sort must anyway be like a good gust of the mistral, not very soothing, but health-giving. As for me, it gives me very great pleasure I can assure you, and will contribute greatly to bringing me out of my moral fatigue and perhaps from my listlessness.  Anyway, there’s enough to bring back the taste for life a little when I think that I myself am going to be promoted uncle of this boy planned by your wife. I find it quite funny that she’s so convinced that it’s a boy, but anyway, we’ll see. Anyway, in the meantime I can do nothing but fiddle with my paintings a little. I have one on the go of a moonrise over the same field as the croquis in the Gauguin letter, but in which stacks replace the wheat. It’s dull ochre-yellow and violet. Anyway, you’ll see in a while from now. I also have a new one with ivy on the go. Above all, dear fellow, I beg of you, don’t fret or worry or be melancholy on my account, the idea that you would do so, certainly in this necessary and salutary quarantine, would have little justification when we need a slow and patient recovery. If we manage to grasp that, we spare our forces for this winter. I imagine that winter must be quite dismal here, anyway will however have to try and occupy myself. I often imagine that I could retouch a lot of last year’s studies from Arles this winter. Thus, having kept back these past few days a large study of an orchard which was very difficult (it’s the same orchard of which you’ll find a variation in the consignment, but quite a vague one), I’ve set to reworking it from memory, and have found a way better to express the harmony of the tones.  Tell me, have you received any drawings from me? I sent you some once, by parcel post, half a dozen, and then later ten or so. If by chance you haven’t received them, they must have been at the railway station for days and weeks.
   The doctor was telling me about Monticelli, that he had always considered him eccentric, but as for mad, he had only been a little that way towards the end. Considering all the miseries of M’s last years, is it any surprise that he bowed beneath a weight that was too heavy, and is one right in trying to deduce from that that he failed in his work, artistically speaking? I dare to believe not. There was some very logical calculation about him, and an originality as a painter, so it remains regrettable that one wasn’t able to sustain it so as to make its blossoming more complete. I enclose a croquis of the cicadas from here. Their song in times of great heat holds the same charm for me as the cricket in the peasant’s hearth at home. My dear fellow – let’s not forget that small emotions are the great captains of our lives, and that these we obey without knowing it. If it’s still hard for me to regain courage over faults committed and to be committed, which would be my recovery, let’s not forget from that moment on that neither our spleens and melancholies nor our feelings of good nature and good sense are our sole guides, and above all not our final custodians, and that if you yourself also find yourself facing hard responsibilities to venture, if not to take, my word let’s not be too concerned with each other, while it so happens that life’s circumstances in situations so far removed from our youthful conceptions of the life of the artist would render us brothers after all, as being companions in fate in many respects. Things are so closely connected that here one sometimes finds cockroaches in the food as if one were really in Paris, on the other hand it can happen in Paris that you sometimes have a real thought of the fields. It’s certainly not much, but it’s reassuring anyway. So take your fatherhood as a good fellow from our old heaths would take it, those heaths that remain ineffably dear to us through all the noise, tumult, fog, anguish of the towns, however timid our tenderness may be. That’s to say, take your fatherhood there, from your nature as an exile and a foreigner and a poor man, henceforth basing himself with the poor man’s instinct on the probability of the real existence of a native country, of a real existence at least of the memory, even while we’ve forgotten every day. Thus sooner or later we find our fate. But certainly for you, as well as for me, it would be a little hypocritical to forget completely our good humour, the confident sloppiness we had as the poor devils we were as we came and went in that Paris, so strange now – and to place too much weight upon our cares. Truly, I’m so pleased with the fact that if sometimes there are cockroaches in the food here, in your home there is wife and child. Besides, it’s reassuring that Voltaire, for example, left us free to believe not absolutely all of what we imagine. Thus while sharing your wife’s concerns about your health I’m not going so far as to believe what momentarily I was imagining, that worries about me were the cause of your relatively rather long silence in respect of me, although this is so well explained when one thinks of how preoccupying a pregnancy must necessarily be. But it’s very good and it’s the path where everyone walks in life. More soon, and good handshake to you and to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. In haste, but didn’t want to delay sending the letter for our friend Gauguin, you must have the address. 
    My dear Theo, I thank Jo very much for writing to me, and knowing that you wish me to write you a line I’m letting you know that it’s very difficult for me to write, so disturbed is my mind. So I’m taking advantage of an interval. Dr Peyron is really kind to me and really patient. You can imagine that I’m very deeply distressed that the attacks have recurred when I was already beginning to hope that it wouldn’t recur. You’ll perhaps do well to write a line to Dr Peyron to say that working on my paintings is quite necessary to me for my recovery. For these days, without anything to do and without being able to go into the room he had allocated me for doing my painting, are almost intolerable to me.
   I’ve received catalogue of the Gauguin, Bernard, Schuffenecker &c. exhibition, which I find interesting. G. also wrote me a kind letter, still a little vague and obscure, but anyway I must say that I think they’re quite right to have exhibited among themselves. For many days I’ve been absolutely distraught, as in Arles, just as much if not worse, and it’s to be presumed that these crises will recur in the future, it is ABOMINABLE. I haven’t been able to eat for 4 days, as my throat is swollen. It’s not in order to complain too much, I hope, if I tell you these details, but to prove to you that I’m not yet in a fit state to go to Paris or to Pont-Aven unless it were to Charenton.
   It appears that I pick up filthy things and eat them, although my memories of these bad moments are vague, and it appears to me that there’s something shady about it, still for the same reason that they have I don’t know what prejudice against painters here. I no longer see any possibility for courage or good hope, but anyway it wasn’t yesterday that we found out that this profession isn’t a happy one. All the same it gives me pleasure that you’ve received that consignment from here, the landscapes. Thank you above all for that etching after Rembrandt. It’s surprising, and yet it makes me think again of the man with the staff in the La Caze gallery. If you want to do me a very, very great pleasure, then 
   send a copy of it to Gauguin. Then the Rodin and Claude Monet brochure is really interesting. This new crisis, my dear brother, came upon me in the fields, and when I was in the middle of painting on a windy day. I’ll send you the canvas, which I nevertheless finished. And it was precisely a more sober attempt, matt in colour without looking impressive, broken greens, reds and rusty ochre yellows, as I told you that from time to time I felt a desire to begin again with a palette like the one in the north. I’ll send you that canvas as soon as I can. Good-day, thank you for all your kindnesses, good handshake to you and to Jo, and naturally to Cor if he’s still there. Vincent Mother and Wil have also written me a very nice letter. Whilst not liking Rod’s book excessively, I’ve nevertheless done a canvas of that passage in which he speaks of the darkish mountains and huts. (Our friend Roulin has written to me too.)14 My dear Theo, Since I wrote to you I’m feeling better, and whilst I don’t know if it’ll last I don’t want to wait any longer to write to you again. Thanks once again for that beautiful etching after Rembrandt. I’d very much like to get to know the painting and know in which period of his life he painted it. All this goes with the Rotterdam portrait of Fabritius, the traveller in the La Caze gallery, into a special category in which the portrait of a human being is transformed into something luminous and consoling. And how very different this is from Michelangelo or Giotto, although the latter however comes close to it, and Giotto thus forms a sort of possible hyphen between the school of Rembrandt and the Italians.  Yesterday I started working again a little – a thing I see from my window – a field of yellow stubble which is being ploughed, the opposition of the purplish ploughed earth with the strips of yellow stubble, background of hills.
   Work distracts me infinitely better than anything else, and if I could once really throw myself into it with all my energy that might possibly be the best remedy. The impossibility of having models, a heap of other things, prevent me from managing it however. Anyway, I really must try to take things a little passively and be patient. I often think of our pals in Brittany, who are certainly doing better work than I am. If, with the experience I’m having at present, it was possible for me to begin again, I wouldn’t go and look around the south. Were I independent and free, I would nevertheless have retained my enthusiasm, for there are some really beautiful things to do. Such as the vineyards, the fields of olive trees. If I had confidence in the management here, nothing would be better and simpler than to put all my furniture here at the hospital and quietly continue. If I were to recover, or in the intervals, I could sooner or later come back to Paris or Brittany for a time. But first they’re very expensive here, and then I’m afraid of the other patients at the moment. Anyway, a heap of reasons mean that I don’t think I’ve been lucky here either. I’m perhaps exaggerating in the sadness I feel at being knocked down by illness again – but I feel a kind of fear. You’ll tell me what I tell myself too, that the fault must be inside me and not in the circumstances or other people. Anyway, it isn’t fun.
   Mr Peyron has been kind to me and he has long experience, I shan’t scorn what he says or considers good. But will he have a firm opinion, has he written anything definite to you?? And possible? You can see that I’m still in a very bad mood, it’s because things aren’t going well. Then I consider myself imbecilic to go and ask doctors for permission to make paintings. Besides, it’s to be hoped that if I recover sooner or later, up to a certain point it’ll be because I’ve cured myself by working, which fortifies the will and consequently allows these mental weaknesses less hold. My dear brother, I wanted to write to you better than this, but things aren’t going very well. I have a great desire to go into the mountains to paint for whole days, I hope they’ll allow me to in the coming days. You’ll soon see a canvas of a hut in the mountains8 which I did under the influence of that book by Rod. It would be good for me to stay on a farm for a while, at least I might do some good work there. I must write to Mother and to Wil in the next few days. Wil asked to be sent a painting, and I’d very much like to give one to Lies as well on the same occasion, who doesn’t have any yet as far as I know. What do you say about Mother going to live in Leiden? I think she’s right in this sense, that I can understand that she’s pining for her grandchildren. And then there’ll be none of us left in Brabant. Speaking of that – not very long ago in Arles I was reading a book, I can’t remember which one, by Henri Conscience. It’s excessively sentimental if you like, what with his peasants, but speaking of Impressionism do you know that it 
   contains descriptions of landscape with colour notes of accuracy, feeling and primitiveness of the first order. And it’s always like that. Ah my dear brother, those heaths in the Kempen12 were something though. But anyway, that won’t come back, and onward we go. He – Conscience – described a brand-new little house with a bright red slate roof in the full sunshine, a garden with dock and onions, potatoes with dark foliage, a beech hedge, a vineyard, and further on the pine trees, the broom all yellow. Don’t be afraid, it wasn’t like a Cazin, it was like a Claude Monet. Then there’s originality even in the excess of sentimentality. And as for me, who feels it and can’t damned well do anything, isn’t that sickening. If you get opportunities for lithographs of Delacroix, Rousseau, Diaz &c., ancient and modern artists, Galeries modernes &c., I can’t advise you too strongly to hold onto them, for you’ll see that they’ll become rare. Yet it was really the way to popularize beautiful things, those 1-franc sheets of those days, those etchings &c. back then. Very interesting the Rodin – Claude Monet brochure. How I’d have liked to see that. Pointless to say that nevertheless I don’t agree when he says that Meissonier is nothing and that T. Rousseau isn’t much. Meissoniers and Rousseaus are something highly interesting for those who like them and try to discover what the artist was feeling. It isn’t possible for everyone to be of that opinion, because one has to have seen and looked at them, and you don’t find that on every corner. Now a Meissonier, if you look at it for a year there’s still enough in it to look at the next year, never fear. Not to mention that he’s a man who had his days of happiness, of perfect finds. Certainly I know, Daumier, Millet, Delacroix have another way of drawing – but Meissonier’s execution, 
         that something essentially French above all, although  the old Dutchmen would find nothing  to fault in it, and yet it’s something other than them and it’s modern; one has to be blind to believe that Meissonier isn’t an artist and – one of the first rank. Have many things been done that give the note of the 19th century better than the portrait of Hetzel? When Besnard did those two very beautiful panels, primitive man and modern man, which we saw at Petit’s, in making the modern man a reader he had the same idea. And I’ll always regret that in our times people believe in the incompatibility of the generation of, say, 48 and the present one. I myself believe that the two hold their own all the same, though I can’t prove it. Let’s take good Bodmer for example. Was he not able to study nature as a hunter, a savage, did he not love it and know it with experience of an entire long manly life – and do you think that the first Parisian to come along who goes to the suburbs knows as much or more about it because he’ll do a landscape with harsher tones? Not that it’s bad to use pure and clashing tones, not that from the point of view of colour I’m always an admirer of Bodmer, but I admire and I like the man who knew all the forest of Fontainebleau, from the insect to the wild boar and from the stag to the lark. From the tall oak and the lump of rock to the fern and the blade of grass. Now a thing like that, not anyone who wants to can feel it or find it.
   And Brion – oh a maker of Alsatian genre paintings people will tell me. That’s fine, he has indeed done the Engagement meal, the Protestant wedding &c. which are indeed Alsatian. When no one is up to illustrating Les Misérables, he however does it in a manner unsurpassed up to now, and he isn’t mistaken in his types. Is it a small thing to know people so well, the humanity of that period, so well that one scarcely makes a mistake in expression and type? Ah – the rest of us would have to get old working hard, and that’s why we then get despondent when things don’t go right. I think that if you see the Bruyas museum in Montpellier one day, I think that then nothing will move you more than Bruyas himself, when one realizes from his purchases what he sought to be for artists. It’s a little disheartening when one sees from certain portraits of him how heartbroken and obviously frustrated his face is. If one doesn’t succeed in the south there still remains he who suffered all his life for that cause. The only serene portraits are the Delacroix21 and the Ricard. For example, by a great chance the one by Cabanel is accurate and most interesting as an observation, at least it gives an idea of the man.
   I’m pleased that Jo’s mother has come to Paris. Next year it will perhaps be a little different and you’ll have a child, and that brings a fair few petty vexations of human life24 – but as certain great miseries of spleen etc. will disappear for ever, that’s certainly how it should go. I’ll write to you again soon, I’m not writing to you as I would have wished, I hope that all is well at your place and will continue to go well. Am very, very pleased that Rivet has rid you of the cough, which really worried me a bit too. What I had in my throat is starting to disappear, I’m still eating with some difficulty, but anyway it has got better. Good handshake to you and to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear brother, Although I’ve already written to you, there are still many things you have told me and to which I haven’t yet replied. First that you’ve rented a room in Tanguy’s house and that my canvases are there, that’s most interesting – provided you’re not paying a lot for it1 – the expenses still continuing and the canvases still taking their time to bring anything back in, that often frightens me. Be that as it may, I think it’s a very good step, and I thank you for it, as for so many other things. It’s curious that Maus has the idea of inviting young Bernard and me for the next Vingtistes exhibition, I would really like to exhibit there, while feeling my inferiority alongside so many Belgians who have an enormous amount of talent. That Mellery, for instance, is a great artist. And he’s also been holding up for a number of years now. But I would do my best to try to do something good this autumn. I’m working non-stop in my room, which is doing me good and driving away, I imagine, these abnormal ideas. Thus I’ve redone the canvas of the Bedroom. That study is certainly one of the best – sooner or later it will definitely have to be lined. It was painted so quickly and dried in such a way that, as the thinner evaporated immediately, the painting doesn’t adhere at all firmly to the canvas. This will also be the case with other studies of mine that were painted very quickly and with a thick impasto. Besides, this thin canvas perishes after a while and can’t take a lot of impasto. You’ve taken some excellent stretching frames, damn it, if I had some like that here to work on that would be better than these strips of wood from here that warp in the sun. People say – and I’m quite willing to believe it – that it’s difficult to know oneself – but it’s not easy to paint oneself either. Thus I’m working on two portraits of myself at the moment – for want of another model – 
   because it’s more than time that I did a bit of figure work. One I began the first day I got up, I was thin, pale as a devil. It’s dark violet blue and the head whiteish with yellow hair, thus a colour effect. But since then I’ve started another one, three-quarter length on a light background. Then I’m retouching some studies from this summer – anyway I’m working from morning till night. Are you well – darn it, I really wish for you that you were 2 years further on, and that these early days of marriage, however beautiful they may be at times, were behind you. I believe so firmly that a marriage becomes good above all in the long run, and that then one recovers one’s temperament. So take things with a certain northern phlegm and take care of yourselves, both of you. This bloody life in the fine arts is exhausting, so it seems. Strength is coming back to me day by day, and once again it seems to me that I already have almost too much of it. For to remain hard-working at the easel it isn’t necessary to be a Hercules. What you told me about Maus having been to see my canvases has made me think a lot about Belgian painters lately and during my illness. Then memories come to me like an avalanche, and I try to rebuild for myself that whole school of modern Flemish artists to the point of being as homesick as a Swiss. Which isn’t good, for our path is – onward – and retracing one’s steps is forbidden and impossible. That’s to say that one could think about it without getting lost in the past through an over-melancholy nostalgia.
   Anyway, Henri Conscience isn’t a perfect writer at all, but here and there, more or less everywhere, what a painter! And what kindness in what he said and wished for. All the time I have a preface in my head – (the one to Le conscrit) to one of his books in which he says that he’d been very ill and that in his illness, despite all his efforts, he had felt his affection for mankind withering away, and that long walks out in the open fields brought his feelings of love back to him. This inevitability of suffering and despair – anyway, here I am again, recovered for a period – I’m thankful for it. I’m writing you this letter bit by bit in intervals when I’m tired of painting. Work is going quite well – I’m struggling with a canvas begun a few days before my indisposition. A reaper, the study is all yellow, terribly thickly impasted, but the subject was beautiful and simple. I then saw in this reaper – a vague figure struggling like a devil in the full heat of the day to reach the end of his toil – I then saw the image of death in it, in this sense that humanity would be the wheat being reaped. So if you like it’s the opposite of that Sower I tried before. But in this death nothing sad, it takes place in broad daylight with a sun that floods everything with a light of fine gold. Good, here I am again, however I’m not letting go, and I’m trying again on a new canvas. Ah, I could almost believe that I have a new period of clarity ahead of me. And what should I do – continue here for these months, or move – I don’t know. The thing is, when the crises present themselves they aren’t amusing, and to risk having an attack like that with you or others is serious.
   My dear brother – I’m still writing to you between bouts of work – I’m ploughing on like a man possessed, more than ever I have a pent-up fury for work, and I think that this will contribute to curing me. Perhaps something will happen to me like the thing E. Delacroix speaks of – “I found painting when I had neither teeth nor breath left”, in this sense that my sad illness makes me work with a pent-up fury – very slowly – but from morning till night without respite – and – this is probably the secret – work for a long time and slowly. What do I know about it, but I think that I have one or two canvases on the go that aren’t too bad, first the reaper in the yellow wheat, and the portrait on a light background. This will be for the Vingtistes, if indeed they remember me when the time comes. Now, it would be absolutely the same to me, if not preferable, if they forget me. Since I myself don’t forget the inspiration that I gain from giving free rein to my memories of certain Belgians. That’s the positive thing, and the rest is so secondary. And here we are in September already, we’ll soon be in the middle of autumn, and then winter. I’ll carry on working very hard, and then if the crisis returns towards Christmas we’ll see, and once that’s over then I wouldn’t see any disadvantage in sending the management here to all the devils and coming back to the north for a fairly long time. Leaving now would perhaps be too unwise, when I consider a new crisis likely in the winter, i.e. in 3 months. I haven’t set a foot outside for 6 weeks, not even in the garden.
I’ll try, though, next week, when I’ve finished the canvases in progress. But another few months and I’ll be so flabby and stupefied that a change will probably do a lot of good. That, for the moment, is my idea on the subject, of course it isn’t a fixed idea. But am of the opinion that we shouldn’t put ourselves out any more with the people of this establishment than with the owners of a hotel. We’ve rented a room from them for a certain amount of time, and they’re well paid for what they give, and that’s absolutely all.  Not to mention the fact that perhaps they’d like nothing better than for the situation to be chronic, and one would be culpably stupid if one gave in to them on that. For my taste, they make far too many enquiries about not only what I but you earn &c. So let’s give them the slip. Without quarrelling.
   I’m still continuing this letter between times. Yesterday I began the portrait of the chief orderly, and perhaps I’ll also do his wife, for he’s married and lives in a little farmhouse a stone’s throw from the establishment. A most interesting figure. There’s a beautiful etching by Legros of an old Spanish nobleman, if you remember it that will give you an idea of the type. He was at the hospital in Marseille during 2 episodes of cholera, anyway he’s a man who has seen an enormous number of people die and suffer, and there’s an indefinable contemplation in his face, such that I can’t help recalling the face of Guizot – for there’s something of that one in this head – but different. But he’s a man of the people, and simpler. Anyway, you’ll see it if I succeed in it and if I do a repetition of it. I’m struggling with all my energy to master my work, telling myself that if I win this it will be the best lightning conductor for the illness. I take great care of myself by carefully shutting myself away; it’s selfish if you like, not to become accustomed to my companions in misfortune here instead, and to go to see them, but anyway I feel none the worse for it, for my work is progressing and we have need of that, for it’s more than necessary that I do better than before, which wasn’t sufficient. Isn’t it better that if I were to come back from here again, sooner or later, I come back decidedly capable of doing a portrait that has some character, than to come back as I left? It’s coarsely expressed, for I really feel that one can’t say ‘I can do a portrait’ without telling a lie, because that is infinite. But anyway you’ll understand what I want to say, that I must do better than before. At the moment my mind is functioning regularly and I feel absolutely normal – and if I think rationally at present about my condition with the hope of having in general between the crises – if, unfortunately, it’s to be feared that this will always recur from time to time – of having periods of clarity and work between times – if I think rationally 
   at present about my condition then certainly I tell myself that I mustn’t have the idée fixe of being ill. But that I must continue my little career as a painter firmly. To remain for good in an asylum from now on would probably be exaggerating things. I was reading in Le Figaro a few days ago a story of a Russian writer who lived with a nervous illness from which he, moreover, sadly died, which caused him terrible attacks from time to time. And what can one do, there’s no remedy, or if there is it’s to work passionately. I dwell on that more than I should. And all in all I prefer to have a proper illness like this than to be as I was in Paris when it was brewing. Also you’ll see this when you put the portrait with the light background which I’ve just finished beside those I did of myself in Paris, that at present I look healthier than then, and even a great deal more so.  I’m even inclined to believe that the portrait will tell you better than my letter how I am, and that it will reassure you – it cost me some trouble. And then the reaper is working too I think – it’s very, very simple. At the end of the month you can rely on 12 no. 30 canvases I dare say, but there will be almost the same ones twice, the study and the final painting. Anyway later – perhaps my journey into the south will bear fruit however, because the difference of the stronger light, the blue sky, that teaches one to see, and then above all and even only when one sees that for a long time. The north will certainly appear completely new to me, but I’ve looked so much at the things that I’ve become strongly attached to them, and 
   I’ll remain melancholy for a long time. I’m thinking of a funny thing. Modern art is discussed in Manette Salomon, and some artist or other speaking of ‘what will remain’ says: what will remain are ‘the landscape artists’19 – that had a grain of truth, because Corot, Daubigny, Dupré, Rousseau – Millet as a landscape painter, that lasts, and when Corot says on his deathbed: in a dream I saw landscapes with completely pink skies, it was charming;20 then – very good – in Monet, Pissarro, Renoir we see those completely pink skies, so the landscape painters do last well, that was darned true. Let’s leave aside the figure painting of Delacroix, of Millet. Afterwards, what are we beginning to glimpse timidly at the moment that is original and lasting – the portrait. That’s something old, one might say – but it’s also brand new. We’ll talk more about this – but let’s still continue to seek out portraits, above all of artists, like the Guillaumin and Guillaumin’s portrait of a young girl, and take good care of my portrait by Russell, which means a lot to me. Have you framed the Laval portrait, you haven’t told me what you thought of it I think, I found it marvellous, that gaze through the pince-nez, such an honest gaze. The will that I have to do portraits these days is terribly strong, anyway Gauguin and I used to chat about that and about similar questions in such a way as to stretch our nerves to the extinction of all vital warmth. But out of that, however, a few good paintings must emerge I dare think, and we’re seeking them and they must, I imagine, be doing good work in Brittany. I’ve received a letter from G., I think I’ve already told you, and I’m very curious to see what they’re doing one day.
   I must ask you for the following painting items. 

 
 
10 metres canvas


Large 
tubes 
6 
tubes 
zinc white


,,
,,
2
,,
emerald green


 
 
2
,,
cobalt


Small tubes
 
 
 


 
 
2
Carmine


 
 
1 
vermilion


Large tube crimson lake


6 fitch brushes, black hair.


  Then I’ve promised the orderly here an issue of Le Monde Illustré, Issue 1684, 6 July 1889, in which there’s a very pretty engraving after Demont-Breton. Phew – the reaper is finished, I think it will be one that you’ll place in your home – it’s an image of death as the great book of nature27 speaks to us about it – but what I sought is the ‘almost smiling’. It’s all yellow except for a line of violet hills – a pale, blond yellow. I myself find that funny, that I saw it like that through the iron bars of a cell. Ah well, do you know what I hope for once I set myself to having some hope, it’s that the family will be for you what nature is for me, the mounds of earth, the grass, the yellow wheat, the peasant. That’s to say that you find in your love for people the wherewithal not only to work but the wherewithal to console you and restore you when one needs it. So please don’t let yourself be exhausted too much by business matters but take good care of yourselves, both of you – perhaps in a not-too-distant future there’s still some good.
   I really want to redo the reaper one more time for Mother, if not I’ll make her another painting for her birthday, that will come later, for I’ll send it with the rest. For I’m sure that Mother would understand it – for it’s indeed as simple as one of those coarse wood engravings that one finds in country almanacs. Send me the canvas as soon as you can, because I want to do some more repetitions for the sisters too, and if I undertake new autumnal effects I’ll have the wherewithal to fill my time from one end to the other for this month. I’m eating and drinking like a wolf at present. I must say that the doctor30 is very kindly towards me.
 0  Yes, I think it’s a good idea to go and make a few paintings for Holland, for Mother and the two sisters that will make three, i.e. the reaper, the bedroom, the olive trees, wheatfield and cypress, that will make four even, for then I have yet another person for whom I’ll make one too. I’ll work on that with as much pleasure and more calm than for the Vingtistes, that goes without saying, since I’m feeling strong you can be sure that I’m going to try to get through a lot of work. I’m taking the best there are from 12 subjects, so they’ll still have things that are a little studied and chosen. And then there is good in working for people who don’t know what a painting is. Good handshake to you and Jo. Ever yours, Vincent 
 1  I’m opening this letter once more to tell you that I’ve just seen Mr Peyron, I hadn’t seen him for 6 days. He tells me that he’s planning to go to Paris this month and that he’ll see you then. That gives me pleasure, for he has, there’s no doubt about it, a lot of experience, and I think he’ll tell you what he thinks of it quite frankly. To me he only said – ‘let’s hope that it won’t recur’, but anyway I’m counting on it recurring for quite a long time, for a few years at least. But I’m also counting on the fact that work, far from being impossible for me, can go along steadily in the meantime, and is even my remedy. And so I say once more – excluding Mr Peyron the doctor absolutely – that as regards the management here we should probably be polite, but that we should limit ourselves to that but bind ourselves to nothing. It’s very serious that wherever I were to stay here for a little longer I would perhaps come up against popular prejudices – I don’t even know what these prejudices are – which would make my life with them unbearable. But anyway, I’m awaiting what Mr Peyron will say to you, myself I have no idea what his opinion is. I worked this afternoon on the portrait of the orderly, which is progressing. If it weren’t very much tempered – completely – by an intelligent gaze and an expression of kindness – he would be a real bird of prey. He really is a southern type. I’m curious if Mr Peyron’s planned journey will indeed take place this time, I’m very curious to know what may come of it.
 2  With another year’s work, perhaps I’ll arrive at a feeling of self-security from the artistic point of view. And that’s always something worth seeking. But for that I must have good luck. What I dream of in my best moments aren’t so much dazzling colour effects as the half-tones once again. And certainly the visit to the Montpellier museum contributed to turning my thoughts in that direction. For what touched me there more than the magnificent Courbets, which are marvels, the young ladies of the village, the sleeping spinner32 – were the portraits of Bruyas by Delacroix and by Ricard, then the Daniel, Delacroix’s odalisques, all in half-tones. For these odalisques are something quite different from those in the Louvre. It’s above all purplish. But in these half-tones what choice and what quality! It’s time for me to send off this letter at last – I could tell you in two pages what it contains, i.e. nothing new. But anyway, I don’t have time to redo it. Good handshake once again, and if it doesn’t put you out too much let me have the canvas as soon as possible. Ever yours, V. My dear Theo, I think your letter1 is really good, what you say about Rousseau and artists like Bodmer, that they are men in any case, and of such a kind that one would wish the world populated with people like that – yes indeed, that’s what I myself feel too. And that J.H. Weissenbruch knows and does the muddy towpaths, the stunted willows, the foreshortenings and the learned and strange perspectives of the canals ‘as Daumier does his lawyers’, I think that’s perfect. Tersteeg did well to buy some of his work from him, the fact that people like that don’t sell, according to me that’s because there are too many sellers who try to sell other things, with which they deceive the public and mislead them. Do you know that today, still, when I read by chance the story of some energetic industrialist or above all a publisher, that the same feelings of indignation then come to me again, the same feelings of anger from the old days when I was with G.&Cie. Life goes on like that, time doesn’t come back, but I’m working furiously, because of the very fact that I know that the opportunities to work don’t come back. Above all, in my case, where a more violent crisis may destroy my ability to paint forever. In the crises I feel cowardly in the face of anguish and suffering – more cowardly than is justified, and it’s perhaps this very moral cowardice which, while before I had no desire whatsoever to get better, now makes me eat enough for two, work hard, take care of myself in my relations with the other patients for fear of relapsing – anyway I’m trying to get better now like someone who, having wanted to commit suicide, finding the water too cold, tries to catch hold of the bank again.
   My dear brother, you know that I came to the south and threw myself into work for a thousand reasons. To want to see another light, to believe that looking at nature under a brighter sky can give us a more accurate idea of the Japanese way of feeling and drawing. Wanting, finally, to see this stronger sun, because one feels that without knowing it one couldn’t understand the paintings of Delacroix from the point of view of execution, technique, and because one feels that the colours of the prism are veiled in mist in the north. All of this remains somewhat true. Then when one also adds to it an inclination of the heart towards this south that Daudet did in Tartarin, and the fact that here and there I’ve also found friends and things that I love here. Will you then understand that while finding my illness horrible I feel that all the same I’ve entered into attachments that are a little too strong here – attachments which could mean that later on the desire to work here will take hold of me again – while all the same it may well be that I’ll return to the north relatively soon. Yes, for I don’t hide from you the fact that in the same way that I’m taking my food avidly at present, I have a terrible desire that comes to me to see my friends again and to see the northern countryside again. Work is going very well, I’m finding things that I’ve sought in vain for years, and feeling that I always think of those words of Delacroix that you know, that he found painting when he had neither breath nor teeth left.
Ah well, I myself with the mental illness I have, I think of so many other artists suffering mentally, and I tell myself that this doesn’t prevent one from practising the role of painter as if nothing had gone wrong.
   When I see that crises here tend to take an absurd religious turn, I would almost dare believe that this even necessitates a return to the north. Don’t speak too much about this to the doctor when you see him4 – but I don’t know if this comes from living for so many months both at the hospital in Arles and here in these old cloisters. Anyway I ought not to live in surroundings like that, the street would be better then. I am not indifferent, and in the very suffering religious thoughts sometimes console me a great deal. Thus this time during my illness a misfortune happened to me – that lithograph of Delacroix, the Pietà, with other sheets had fallen into some oil and paint and got spoiled. I was sad about it – then in the meantime I occupied myself painting it, and you’ll see it one day, on a no. 5 or 6 canvas I’ve made a copy of it which I think has feeling7 – besides, having not long ago seen the Daniel and the Odalisques and the Portrait of Bruyas and the Mulatto woman at Montpellier, I’m still under the impression that it had on me. This is what edifies me, as does reading a fine book like one by Beecher Stowe or Dickens. But what disturbs me is constantly seeing those good women who believe in the Virgin of Lourdes9 and make up things like that, and telling oneself that one is a prisoner in an administration like that, which very willingly cultivates these unhealthy religious aberrations when it ought to be a matter of curing them. So I say, it would be even better to go, if not into penal servitude then at least into the regiment. I reproach myself for my cowardice, I ought to have defended my studio better, even if I had to fight with those gendarmes and neighbours. Others in my position would have used a revolver, and indeed, had one killed onlookers like that as an artist one would have been acquitted. I would have done better in that case then, and now I was cowardly and drunk. Ill too, but I wasn’t brave. 
   Then in the face of the Suffering of these crises I feel very fearful too, and so I don’t know if my zeal is something other than what I say, it’s like the man who wants to commit suicide, and finding the water too cold he struggles to catch hold of the bank again. But listen – to be in a lodging-house like I saw Braat back then12 – fortunately that time is far off, no and again no. It would be different if père Pissarro or Vignon, for example, wanted to take me into their home. Well I’m a painter myself – that can be sorted out, and better that the money goes to feed painters than to the excellent nuns. Yesterday I asked Mr Peyron point blank: since you’re going to Paris, what would you say if I suggested that you be good enough to take me with you? He answered in an evasive way – that it was too quick, that he must write to you beforehand. But he’s very kind and very indulgent towards me, and whilst he isn’t the absolute master here, far from it, I owe him many freedoms. Anyway, one must not only make paintings but one must also see people and – from time to time, by associating with others too, recover one’s temperament and furnish oneself with ideas. I leave aside the hope that it wouldn’t recur – on the contrary I must tell myself that from time to time I’ll have a crisis. But then one might for that time go into an asylum or even to the town prison, where there’s usually an isolation cell. Don’t worry yourself in any case – work is going well and look, I can’t tell you how much it gives me a warm glow sometimes to say, I’m going to do this and that again, wheatfields &c.
   I’ve done the portrait of the orderly, and I have a repetition of it for you. It makes quite a curious contrast with the portrait I did of myself, in which the gaze is vague and veiled, while he has something military about him, and dark eyes that are small and lively. I made him a present of it, and I’ll also do his wife if she wants to pose. She’s a faded woman, an unfortunate, quite resigned one, and really not much, and so insignificant that I myself have a great desire to do that dusty blade of grass. I spoke with her from time to time when I was doing olive trees behind their little farmhouse, and then she told me that she didn’t think that I was ill – anyway, you would say that too at present if you saw me working, with my thoughts clear and my fingers so sure that I drew that Delacroix Pietà without taking a single measurement, though there are those four outstretched hands and arms – gestures and bodily postures that aren’t exactly easy or simple. Please send me the canvas soon, if that’s possible, and then I think I’ll need 10 tubes of zinc white as well. However, I know quite well that recovery comes, if one is brave, from inside, through the great resignation to suffering and death, through the abandonment of one’s own will and one’s self-love. But it’s not coming to me, I love to paint, to see people and things and everything that makes up our life – artificial – if you like. Yes, real life would be in something else, but I don’t think I belong to that category of souls who are ready to live and also at any moment ready to suffer. What a funny thing the touch is, the brushstroke. Out of doors, exposed to the wind, the sun, people’s curiosity, one works as one can, one fills one’s canvas regardless. Yet then one catches the true and the essential – that’s the most difficult thing. But when one returns to this study again after a time, and orders one’s brushstrokes in the direction of the objects – certainly it’s more harmonious and agreeable to see, and one adds to it whatever one has of serenity and smiles. 
   Ah, I’ll never be able to render my impressions of certain figures I’ve seen here. Certainly the road to the south is the road where there’s something brand new, but men of the north have difficulty in getting through. And I can see myself already in advance, on the day when I have some success, longing for my solitude and distress here when I see the reaper in the field below through the iron bars of the isolation cell. Every cloud has a silver lining. To succeed, to have lasting prosperity, one must have a temperament different from mine, I’ll never do what I could have and ought to have wanted and pursued. But as I have dizzy spells so often, I can only live in a situation of the fourth or fifth rank. While I clearly sense the value and originality and superiority of Delacroix, of Millet, for example, then I make a point of telling myself, yes I am something, I can do something. But I must have a basis in these artists, and then produce the little I’m capable of in the same direction. So père Pissarro has been really cruelly struck by those two misfortunes at the same time. As soon as I read that I had this idea of asking you if there would be a way of going to stay with him. If you pay him the same thing as here, he’ll find it worth his while, for I don’t need much – except for working. So do it directly, and if he doesn’t want to I would willingly go to Vignon’s. I’m a little afraid of Pont-Aven, there are so many people there. But what you say about Gauguin interests me a lot. And I still tell myself that G. and I will perhaps work together again. I myself know that G. can do things even better than what he has done, but how to reassure him! I still hope to do his portrait. Have you seen that portrait he did of me painting sunflowers? My face has lit up after all a lot since, but it was indeed me, extremely tired and charged with electricity as I was then. 
   And yet to see the country one must live with the common people and in the little houses, the bars &c. And that was what I said to Boch, who complained of seeing nothing that tempted him or made an impression on him. I go walking with him for two days and I show him thirty paintings to do, as different from the north as Morocco would be. I’m curious to know what he’s doing at the moment. And then do you know why the paintings of E. Delacroix – the religious and historical paintings, Christ’s barque20 – the Pietà, the Crusaders, have this allure? Because E. Delacroix, when he does a Gethsemane, went to see on the spot beforehand what an olive grove was like, and the same for the sea whipped up by a hard mistral, and because he must have said to himself, these people whom history talks to us about, doges of Venice, crusaders, apostles, holy women, were of the same type and lived in a manner analogous to those of their present-day descendants. So I must tell you it, and you can see it in the Berceuse, however failed and weak that attempt may be. Had I had the strength to continue, I’d have done portraits of saints and of holy women from life, and who would have appeared to be from another century and they would be citizens of the present day, and yet would have had something in common with very primitive Christians. The emotions that that causes are too strong though, I wouldn’t survive it – but later, later, I don’t say that I won’t mount a fresh attack. What a great man Fromentin was – for those who want to see the orient he will always remain the guide. He was first to establish relationships between Rembrandt and the south, between Potter and what he saw himself. You’re right a thousand times over – one mustn’t think about all that – one must do – even if it’s studies of cabbages and salad to calm oneself down, and after being calmed then – what one is capable of. 
   When I see them again I’ll do repetitions of that study of the Tarascon diligence, the Vineyard, the Harvest26 and above all the Red bar, that night café which is the most characteristic as regards colour. But the white figure in the middle, correct as regards colour, must be redone, better constructed. But I dare say that this is a bit of the real south, and a calculated combination of the greens with the reds. My strength has been exhausted too quickly, but I can see from afar the possibility for others to do an infinity of beautiful things. And again and again that idea remains true, that to facilitate the journey of others it would have been good to found a studio somewhere in these parts. To make the journey from the north to Spain in one go, for example, isn’t good, one won’t see there what one ought to see – one must first and gradually accustom one’s eyes to the different light. I myself have no great need to see works by Titian and Velázquez in museums, I’ve seen certain living types who have made me know better now what a painting of the south is than before my little journey. My God, my God, the good people among artists who say that Delacroix is not of the true orient! Look, is the true orient then what Parisians like Gérôme do? Because you paint a bit of sunny wall, even from life and well and true according to our northern way of seeing, does that also prove that you’ve seen the people of the orient? Now that’s what Delacroix was seeking there, which didn’t prevent him at all from painting walls in the Jewish wedding28 and the Odalisques. Isn’t that true – and then Degas says that it’s too expensive to drink in the bars while doing paintings, I don’t say no, but would he then have me go into the cloisters or the churches, there I’m the one who’s afraid. That’s why I make an effort at escape through the present letter, with many handshakes to you and Jo. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I still have to congratulate you on the occasion of Mother’s birthday, I wrote to them yesterday but the letter hasn’t gone off yet, because I wasn’t in the mood to finish it. It’s funny that the idea had already come to me 2 or 3 times before to go to Pissarro’s, this time, after you’ve told me of his recent misfortunes, I don’t hesitate to ask it of you. Yes we must be done here, I can no longer do both things at once, working and doing everything in my power to live with the odd patients here – it’s unsettling. I’d like to force myself to go downstairs, but in vain. And yet it’s almost 2 months since I’ve been out in the open air. In the long run here I would lose the faculty to work, now there I begin to call a halt, and so I’ll send them packing, if you agree. And paying for it what’s more, no, then one or the other of the artists fallen in misfortune will consent to set up house with me. Fortunately, you can write that you’re well, and Jo too, and that her sister is with you. I’d very much like to be back myself when your child arrives – not with you, certainly not, that isn’t possible, but in the area around Paris with another painter. I could, to mention a third, go and stay with the Jouves, who have a lot of children and a whole household. You’ll understand that I’ve tried to compare the second crisis with the first, and I say only this to you: it appears to me to be some kind of influence from outside rather than a cause that comes from within myself. I may be mistaken, but whatever the case I think you’ll consider it right that I’m a little horrified by all religious exaggeration. I can’t help thinking of good André Bonger, who himself let out loud shouts when anyone wanted 
 0  to try out some unguent or other on him. Good Mr Peyron will tell you heaps of things, about probabilities and possibilities of involuntary actions. Good, but if he’s specific I’ll believe none of it. And we’ll see then what he specifies, if it’s specific. The treatment of the patients in this hospital is certainly easy to follow, even on a journey, for they do absolutely nothing about it, they leave them to vegetate in idleness and feed them with stale and slightly spoiled food. And I’ll tell you now that from the first day I refused to take this food, and until my crisis I ate nothing but bread and a little soup, which I’ll continue to do as long as I remain here. It’s true that after this crisis Mr Peyron gave me some wine and meat, which I willingly accept in these first days but wouldn’t want to make an exception to the rule for a long time, and it’s right to respect the establishment according to their ordinary regime. I must also say that Mr Peyron doesn’t give me much hope for the future, which I find justified, he makes me really feel that everything is doubtful, that nothing can be ensured in advance. But I myself am counting on it recurring, but only work preoccupies me so thoroughly that I think that with the body I have it will continue like this for a long time. The idleness in which these poor unfortunates vegetate is a plague, and there you are, it’s a general evil in the towns and country areas under this stronger sun, and having learned differently it’s a duty to resist it, certainly for me. I finish this letter by thanking you again for yours and asking you to write to me again soon, and many handshakes in thought. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for your letter. First, it gives me very great pleasure that you, for your part, had also already thought of père Pissarro. You’ll see that there are other possibilities, if not there then elsewhere. Now business is business, and you ask me to answer categorically – and you’re right to do so – if I would consent to go into an asylum in Paris in the event of moving immediately for this winter. I answer yes to that, with the same calmness and for the same reasons as I entered this one – even though this asylum in Paris might not be ideal, which might easily be the case, for the opportunity to work isn’t bad here, and work my only distraction. But that being said, I’ll point out to you that in my letter I gave a very serious motive as a reason for wishing to move. And I insist on repeating it – I’m astonished that with the modern ideas I have, I being such an ardent admirer of Zola, of De Goncourt and of artistic things which I feel so much, I have crises like a superstitious person would have, and that mixed-up, atrocious religious ideas come to me such as I never had in my head in the north. On the assumption that, very sensitive to surroundings, the already prolonged stay in these old cloisters which are the Arles hospital and the home here would be sufficient in itself to explain these crises – then – even as a stopgap – it might be necessary to go into a lay asylum at present. Nevertheless, to avoid doing or appearing to do anything rash, I declare to you, after having thus warned you of what I might desire at a given moment – that is, a move – I declare to you that I feel sufficiently calm and confident to wait 
   a while longer to see if there’ll be a new attack this winter. But if then I was to write to you: I want to get out of here, you wouldn’t hesitate and it would be arranged in advance, for you would know then that I’d have a serious reason, or even several, to go into a home that wasn’t run like this one by the nuns, however excellent they might be. Now if by some arrangement or another we might move sooner or later, then let’s begin as if almost nothing was wrong, at the same time being very prudent and ready to listen to the least thing that Rivet has to say, but let’s not set ourselves immediately to taking overly official measures as if it were a lost cause. As regards eating a lot, I’m doing so – but if I was my doctor I would forbid it. Not seeing any good for myself in really enormous physical strength, for if I absorb myself in the idea of doing some good work and wanting to be an artist and nothing but that, that would be the most logical thing. Mother and Wil, each for their part after Cor’s departure, have changed surroundings3 – they were darned right. Grief mustn’t build up in our souls like the water of a swamp. But it’s sometimes both costly and impossible to move. Wil wrote very well, it’s a great grief for them, Cor’s departure. It’s funny, just at the moment when I was making that copy of the Pietà by Delacroix4 I discovered where that canvas has gone. It belongs to a queen of Hungary or another country around there who has written poems under the name of Carmen Sylva. The article which talked of her and of the painting was by Pierre Loti, who made one feel that this Carmen Sylva was as a person yet more touching than what she writes – and yet she 
   writes things like this: A woman without a child is like a bell without a clapper – the sound of the bronze would perhaps be very beautiful, but no one will hear it. At present I have 7 copies out of ten of Millet’s Travaux des champs. I can assure you that it interests me enormously to make copies, and that not having any models for the moment it will ensure, however, that I don’t lose sight of the figure. What’s more, it will give me a studio decoration for myself or another. I would like also to copy the Sower and the Diggers. There’s a photo of the Diggers after the drawing. And Lerat’s etching of the Sower at Durand-Ruel’s. In these same etchings is the Field under the snow with a harrow. Then The four times of the day, there are examples of them in the collection of wood engravings. I would like to have all of this, at least the etchings and the wood engravings. It’s a study I need, for I want to learn. Although copying may be the old system, that absolutely doesn’t bother me at all. I’m going to copy Delacroix’s Good Samaritan too. I’ve done a portrait of a woman – the orderly’s wife – which I think you’d like. I’ve done a repetition of it which wasn’t as good as the one from life. And I fear that they’ll take the latter, I would have liked you to have it. It’s pink and black. Today I’m sending you my portrait of myself, you must look at it for some time – you’ll see, I hope, that my physiognomy has grown much calmer, although the gaze may be vaguer than before, so it appears to me.
   I have another one which is an attempt from when I was ill. But I think this one will please you more, and I’ve tried to create something simple, show it to père Pissarro if you see him. You’ll be surprised what effect the Travaux des champs take on in colour, it’s a very intimate series of his. What I’m seeking in it, and why it seems good to me to copy them, I’m going to try to tell you. We painters are always asked to compose ourselves and to be nothing but composers. Very well – but in music it isn’t so – and if such a person plays some Beethoven he’ll add his personal interpretation to it – in music, and then above all for singing – a composer’s interpretation is something, and it isn’t a hard and fast rule that only the composer plays his own compositions. Good – since I’m above all ill at present, I’m trying to do something to console myself, for my own pleasure. I place the black-and-white by Delacroix or Millet or after them in front of me as a subject. And then I improvise colour on it but, being me, not completely of course, but seeking memories of their paintings – but the memory, the vague consonance of colours that are in the same sentiment, if not right – that’s my own interpretation. Heaps of people don’t copy. Heaps of others do copy – for me, I set myself to it by chance, and I find that it teaches and above all sometimes consoles. So then my brush goes between my fingers as if it were a bow on the violin and absolutely for my pleasure. Today I attempted the Sheep shearer in a colour scale ranging from lilac to yellow. They are small canvases, around no. 5.
   I thank you very much for the consignment of canvases and colours. On the other hand, I’m sending you a few canvases with the portrait, the following 

Moonrise (wheatsheaves)17


Study 
of fields18


,,
of olive trees19


Night study20


The mountain21
      Field of green wheat22
      Olive trees23
      Orchard in blossom24
    Entrance to a quarry25


 The first four canvases are studies that don’t have the effect of an ensemble like the others. Myself I quite like the Entrance to a quarry which I did when I felt this attack beginning, because to my taste the dark greens go well with the ochre tones, there’s something sad in them that’s healthy, and that’s why it doesn’t annoy me. That’s perhaps also the case with the Mountain. People will tell me that mountains aren’t like that, and that there are black contours as wide as a finger. But anyway it seemed to me that it expressed the passage in Rod’s book – one of the very rare passages of his in which I find something good – on a lost land of dark mountains in which one noticed the darkish huts of goatherds, where sunflowers bloomed. The olive trees with white cloud and background of mountains, as well as the Moonrise and the Night effect – These are exaggerations from the point of view of the arrangement, their lines are contorted like those of the ancient woodcuts. The olive trees are more in character, just as in the other study27 and I’ve tried to express the time of day when one sees the green beetles and the cicadas flying in the heat. The other canvases – the Reaper28 &c. aren’t dry. And now in the bad season I’m going to make a lot of copies, for really I must do more figure work. It’s the study of the figure that teaches one to grasp the essential and to simplify.
   When you say in your letter that I’ve never done anything but work, no – that’s not right – I myself am very, very discontented with my work, and the only thing that consoles me is that experienced people say that one must paint for 10 years for nothing. But what I’ve done is only those 10 years of unfortunate studies that didn’t come off. Now a better period could come, but I’ll have to strengthen the figure work, and I must refresh my memory by very close study of Delacroix, Millet. Then I’ll try to sort out my drawing. Yes, every cloud has a silver lining, it gives one more time for study. I’m also adding a study of flowers to the roll of canvases – not much, but anyway I don’t want to tear it up. All in all the only things I consider a little good in it are the Wheatfield, the Mountain, the Orchard, the Olive trees with the blue hills and the Portrait and the Entrance to the quarry, and the rest says nothing to me, because it lacks personal will, feeling in the lines. Where these lines are close together and deliberate the painting begins, even if it may be exaggerated. That’s what Bernard and Gauguin feel a little bit, they won’t ask for the correct shape of a tree at all, but they absolutely insist that one says if the shape is round or square – and my word, they’re right – Exasperated by certain people’s photographic and inane perfection. They won’t ask for the correct tone of the mountains but they’ll say: for Christ’s sake, were the mountains blue, then chuck on some blue and don’t go telling me that it was a blue a bit like this or like that, it was blue wasn’t it? Good – make them blue and that’s enough! Gauguin is a genius sometimes when he explains that, but as for the genius Gauguin has, he’s very timid about showing it, and it’s touching how he likes to say something really useful to young folk. What an odd fellow all the same.
   It gives me great pleasure that Jo is well, and I think you’ll feel much more in your element thinking of her pregnancy, and naturally having concerns about it too, than if you were alone without these family concerns. For you’ll feel more in nature. When one thinks of Millet and Delacroix, what a contrast. Delacroix without a wife, without children, Millet completely in his family, more than anyone. And yet what similarities there are in their work. So Jouve has still kept his big studio and he’s working on decorations. That one came very close to being an excellent painter. It’s money troubles with him, in order to eat he’s forced to do a thousand things other than painting, which costs him more money than it brings in when he makes something beautiful. And he quickly loses his touch for drawing with the brush. This probably comes from the old training method, which is the same as the current one – in the studios – they fill in outlines. And Daumier was always painting his face in the mirror to learn how to draw!33 Do you know what I think about quite often – what I used to say to you back in the old days, that if I didn’t succeed I still thought that what I had worked on would be continued. Not directly, but one isn’t alone in believing things that are true. And what does one matter as a person then? I feel so strongly that the story of people is like the story of wheat, if one isn’t sown in the earth to germinate there, what does it matter, one is milled in order to become bread. The difference between happiness and unhappiness, both are necessary and useful, and death or passing away... it’s so relative – and so is life.
   Even in the face of an illness that’s unsettling or worrying, this belief is absolutely unshaken. I’d have liked to see those Meuniers. Well, let it be understood that if I were to write to you again expressly and briefly that I wanted to come to Paris, I would have a reason for that, which I’ve explained above, that in the meantime there’s no great hurry, and I’m quite confident, after warning you, to wait for the winter and the crisis which may recur then. But if I have another fit of religious exaltation, then no delay, I’d like to leave immediately without giving a reason. Only we have no right, at least it would be indiscreet, to meddle in the nuns’ management or even to criticize them. They have their own belief and ways of doing good to others, sometimes it works very well. But I don’t warn you lightly. And it isn’t to regain more freedom or something else that I don’t have. So let’s wait very calmly until an opportunity presents itself to find a place. It’s a great advance that my stomach is working well, and so I don’t think that I’ll be as sensitive to the cold. Then I know what to do when the weather is bad, as I have this plan to copy several things that I like. I’d very much like to see Millet reproductions in schools, I think there would be children who became painters if only they saw good things. Give my warm regards to Jo, and handshake, more soon.  Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’m dropping you another line to explain that 3 studies are missing from the consignment of canvases (which you will have already), since by removing them the roll cost 3. francs less for carriage. So I’ll send them next opportunity – or rather they’re leaving today with other canvases – the following. Wheatfield1
Wheatfield and cypresses2
ditto3

The ivy4

Study of cypresses5
Reaper6
ditto7
The olive trees8 then also the three studies mentioned below, Poppies9 – Night effect10 – Moonrise11. Soon I’m sending you a few smaller canvases with the 4 or 5 studies I wanted to give to Mother and our sister. These studies are drying at the moment. It’s no. 10 and no. 12 canvases, reductions of the Wheatfield and cypresses, Olive trees, Reaper14 and Bedroom15 and a little portrait of me. This will give them a good start, and I think this will give both you and me some pleasure to ensure that our sister or sisters have a small collection of paintings. I’ll do reductions of the best canvases with them in mind, in this way I also wanted them to have the red and green vineyard, the pink chestnut trees, the night effect that you exhibited.
   You’ll see that I’m gaining a little patience, and that persevering will be a result of my illness. I feel more detached from many preoccupations. You’ll send me one day, when it suits you, the red vineyard and other canvases with that aim when you’ve seen the 5 that I’ve done. Now for that reaper – at first I feared that the large format repetition that I’m sending you wasn’t bad – but afterwards, when the days of mistral and rain came, I preferred the canvas done from life, which appeared a little odd to me. But no, when the weather’s cold and sad, it’s precisely that one that makes me remember once again that summer furnace over the white-hot wheat, so the exaggeration isn’t as much as all that. Père Peyron came back and chatted with me about seeing you, and said that no doubt your letter would tell me all the details of the conversation he’d had with you. That in any case the upshot was that it would be wise to go on waiting here. Which, also being my opinion, goes without saying. Nevertheless, if an attack recurs I still want to try a change of climate, and even to return to the north as a stopgap.
   Mr Peyron said that you looked as if you were well, which gives me pleasure. I’ve received the 10 tubes of white, but as soon as possible I’ll need another dozen zinc white 

 
2 
large 
tubes 
Cobalt


 
1
,,
,,
Emerald


 
1
,,
,,
Chrome 1


 
1
small tube carmine


 For there are fine autumnal effects to do. At present I feel completely normal and no longer remember those bad days at all. With work and very regular food this will probably last for quite a long time, so-so, and I’ll also do my work all the same without it appearing. For at the end of the month you’ll receive another dozen studies. Am I mistaken, but it seems to me that your letter is very delayed this time? Unfortunately there are no vineyards here, otherwise I’d promised myself to do nothing else this autumn. There are some, but for that I would have had to go and stay in another village.
   On the other hand the olive trees are very characteristic, and I’m struggling to capture that. It’s silver, sometimes more blue, sometimes greenish, bronzed, whitening on ground that is yellow, pink, purplish or orangeish to dull red ochre. But very difficult, very difficult. But that suits me and attracts me to work fully in gold or silver. And one day perhaps I’ll do a personal impression of it, the way the sunflowers are for yellows. If only I’d had some of them this autumn. But this half-freedom often prevents one from doing what one nevertheless feels able to do. Patience, however, you’ll tell me, and it’s indeed necessary. Give my warm regards to Jo, look after yourself, and write soon please. Handshakes. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I was longing for your letter and so I was very happy to receive it, and to see from it that you’re well, as are Jo and the friends you speak of. I must ask you to send me the whites I asked for as soon as possible, and to add to them some canvas, 5 metres or 10, whichever suits. Then I must begin by telling you a piece of rather vexing news, as I see it. It’s that during the stay here there have been a few expenses which I thought Mr Peyron had notified you about as they occurred, which he told me the other day he hadn’t done, with the result that it has mounted up to around 125 francs, deducting from it the 10 you sent by postal order. It’s for paint, canvas, frames and stretching frames, my trip the other day to Arles, a piece of linen clothing, and various repairs. I’m using two colours here, lead white and ordinary blue, but in quite large quantities, and the canvas, that’s for when I want to work on unprepared, stronger canvas. This comes unfortunately just at this time when I would gladly have repeated my trip to Arles etc. That said, I’ll tell you that we’re having some superb autumn days, and that I’m taking advantage of them. I have a few studies, among others a mulberry tree, all yellow on stony ground standing out against the blue of the sky, in which study I think that you’ll see that I’ve found Monticelli’s track. You’ll have received the consignment of canvases I sent you last Saturday. It surprises me a lot that Mr Isaäcson wants to do an article on studies of mine. I’d willingly urge him to wait a little longer, his article would lose absolutely nothing by it, and with another year of work I could hope to put more characteristic things in front of him with more willpower in the drawing, more knowledge of the Provençal south. 
   Mr Peyron was very kind to talk of my case in those terms – I haven’t dared ask him to go to Arles one of these days, which I’d very much like to do, believing that he would disapprove. Not, though, that I suspected that he believed there was a connection between my previous trip and the crisis that closely followed it. The thing is that there are a few people over there whom I felt and once again feel the need to see again. While I don’t have here in the south, like good Prévost , a mistress who holds me captive, I couldn’t help becoming attached to people and things. And now that I’m staying on here for the time being, and will most probably spend the winter here – in the spring – in the fine season, shall I not stay here too? That will depend on my health above all. What you say of Auvers is nevertheless a very agreeable prospect to me, and sooner or later that ought to be fixed without seeking further. If I come to the north, even supposing that there’s no room in this Doctor’s home, it’s probable that he would, on père Pissarro’s recommendation and your own, find either board with a family or quite simply at the inn. The main thing is to know the doctor so that, in the event of a crisis, one doesn’t fall into the hands of the police and isn’t forcibly carried off into an asylum. And I can assure you that the north will interest me like a brand-new country. 
   But anyway, for the moment there’s therefore nothing that’s absolutely hurrying us. I reproach myself for being so behind with my correspondence, I’d like to write to Isaäcson, Gauguin and Bernard. But writing doesn’t always come, and what’s more, work is pressing. Yes, I’d like to say to Isaäcson that he would do well to wait longer, there isn’t yet that in it that I hope to attain if my health continues. It’s not worth mentioning anything about my work at the moment. When I’m back, at best it will form a kind of ensemble, ‘Impressions of Provence’. But what does he want to say now when the olive trees, the fig trees, the vineyards, the cypresses must be more accentuated, all characteristic things, the same as the Alpilles, which must get more character. How I’d like to see what Gauguin and Bernard have brought back. I have a study of two yellowed poplars on a background of mountains, and a view of the park here, autumnal effect, some of the draughtsmanship of which is more naive and more – at home. Anyway, it’s difficult to leave a land before having something to prove that one has felt and loved it. 
   If I come back to the north I plan to do a whole lot of Greek studies, you know, painted studies with white and blue and only a little orange, just like in the open air. I must draw and seek style. Yesterday at the almoner’s here I saw a painting that made an impression on me. A Provençal lady with an intelligent, pure-bred face, in a red dress. A figure like the ones Monticelli thought of. It wasn’t without great faults, but there was simplicity in it, and how sad it is to see how much they have degenerated from it here, as we have from ours in Holland. I’m writing to you in haste so as not to wait to answer your kind letter, hoping that you’ll write again without delaying long. I’ve seen more very beautiful subjects for tomorrow – in the mountains. Kind regards to Jo and to our friends, above all when you get the chance thank père Pissarro for his information, which will certainly be useful. Shaking both your hands, believe me Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I’ve just brought back a canvas I’ve been working on for some time, once again of the same field as the one of the reaper. Now it’s mounds of earth and the background parched lands, then the rocks of the Alpilles. A bit of blue-green sky with small white and violet cloud. In the foreground: A thistle and some dry grass. A peasant dragging a bundle of straw in the middle. It’s another harsh study, and instead of being almost entirely yellow it makes an almost completely violet canvas. Broken and neutral violets. But I’m writing you this because I think that this will complement the reaper and will make it easier to see what it is. For the reaper appears done at random, and this with it will balance it. As soon as it’s dry I’ll send it to you with the repetition of the bedroom. I seriously ask you to show them together, if someone or other comes to see the studies, because of the opposition of the complementaries. Then this week I’ve done the entrance to a quarry, which is like a Japanese thing, you’ll well remember that there are Japanese drawings of rocks where grasses and little trees grow here and there. There are moments between times when nature is superb, autumnal effects glorious in colour, green skies contrasting with yellow, orange, green vegetation, earth in all shades of violet, burnt grass where the rains have nevertheless given a last vigour to certain plants, which again start to produce little violet, pink, blue, yellow flowers. Things that make you quite melancholy not to be able to render them. And the skies – like our northern skies, but the colours of the sunsets and sunrises are more varied and more pure. As in works by Jules Dupré and Ziem. I also have two views of the park and the asylum in which this place appears most agreeable. I tried to reconstruct the thing as it may have been by simplifying and accentuating the proud, unchanging nature of the pines and the cedar bushes against the blue.
   Anyway – if they should happen to remember me – which I’m not keen on – there’ll be enough to send something coloured to the Vingtistes. But I’m indifferent to that. What I’m not indifferent to is that a man who is far superior to me, Meunier, has painted the female thrutchers of the Borinage and the shift going to the pit and the factories, their red roofs and their black chimneys against a delicate grey sky5 – all things I’ve dreamed of doing, feeling that it hadn’t been done and that it ought to be painted. And still, there’s an infinite number of subjects there for artists, and one should go down into the depths and paint the light effects. If you haven’t yet sent the canvas and the colours, you should know that I now have absolutely no canvas. And I was going to ask you if you would find it difficult to send the amount of what I owe to Mr Peyron immediately, if it was possible for you then to send me about fifteen francs by postal order, I would go to Arles one of these days. It often seems to me that if Gauguin had remained here he wouldn’t have lost anything, for I clearly see, also in the letter he wrote me, that he isn’t entirely at the top of his form. And I know well the cause of that – they’re too hard up to find models, and living as cheaply as he thought possible at the beginning won’t have lasted. However, with his patience, next year will perhaps be dazzling. But then he won’t have Bernard with him if the latter does his military service. Do you sense how much the figures of Jules Breton and Billet10 and others will remain? Those people overcame the difficulty of models, and that’s a lot. And a painting like that by Otto Weber from the good period (not the English)11 is bound to hold its own. One swallow doesn’t make a summer, and one new idea doesn’t in any way destroy works that have been done and perfected. That’s the terrible thing about the Impressionists, that the development of the thing gets stuck, and that for years they’re left facing obstacles that the preceding generation had overcome, the difficulty of money and models. And so Breton, Billet and others really are certain to mock it and be astonished and say: ‘come on, when are we going to see your peasants and your peasant women?’ As for me, I feel ashamed and defeated. I’ve copied that woman with a child sitting beside a hearth by Mrs Demont-Breton, almost all violet, I’m certainly going to continue copying, it will give me a collection of my own, and when it’s 
   sufficiently large and complete I’ll give the whole lot to a school. I can also tell you that next consignment you’ll become better acquainted with good Tartarin’s Alpilles, which up to now – apart from the canvas of the mountains14 – you haven’t yet seen unfold, except in the distant background of the canvases. I have a study, rougher than the previous one of the mountains. A very wild ravine where a slender stream weaves its way along its bed of rocks. It’s all violet. I could certainly do an entire series of these Alpilles, for having seen them for a long time now I’ve got used to it a little. You remember that fine landscape by Monticelli that we saw at Delarebeyrette’s, of a tree on some rocks against a sunset. There are a lot of effects like that at the moment, only I can’t ever be outside at the time the sun sets, otherwise I would have tried it. Does Jo continue in good health? I think that all in all this year is happier for you than the preceding ones. As for me, my health has been good lately – I really think that Mr Peyron is right when he says that strictly speaking I’m not mad, for my thoughts are absolutely normal and clear between times, and even more than before, but during the crises it’s terrible however, and then I lose consciousness of everything. But it drives me to work and to seriousness, as a coal-miner who is always in danger makes haste in what he does. Our mother and sister will be making their preparations to move house. I’m enclosing a note for Isaäcson, Bernard and Gauguin. Naturally there’s no urgency at all to get it to them. The first time they come to see you will suffice. In the evenings I’m bored to death, my God the prospect of winter isn’t a cheery one. I hope that you’ll have received the canvases sent about ten days ago in good order. I’m going off for a long hike in the mountains to look for sites. More soon – above all send the paint and the canvas if it hasn’t been sent, for I’ve no canvas left at all, nor any zinc white. Kind regards to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter and for the 150 francs – which I’ve handed to Mr Peyron, asking him again to tell you each month if there have been expenses, yes or no – so that it doesn’t mount up. I must also thank you for a consignment of colours, and finally yesterday evening the canvas1 and the Millet reproductions2 arrived, which I’m very pleased about. Mr Peyron repeated to me again that there’s considerable improvement and that he’s optimistic– and that he sees no objection at all to my going to Arles in the coming days. However, melancholy very often overtakes me with great force, and besides, the more my health returns to normal the more my mind is capable of reasoning very coldly, the more to do painting that costs us so much and doesn’t bring in anything, not even the cost of producing them, seems madness to me, a thing completely against reason. Then I feel utterly sad, and the bad thing is that at my age it’s darned difficult to start again with something else. In the few Dutch papers you added to the Millets – I notice Parisian letters, which I attribute to Isaäcson. It’s very subtle, and one deduces that the author is a painful, anxious person of a rare tenderness – a tenderness that makes me think immediately of the Reisebilder of H. Heine. No need to tell you that I find what he says about me in a note5 extremely exaggerated, and one more reason why I prefer him not to say anything about me. 
   And in all these articles I find, beside very refined things, something, I don’t know what, that appears sick to me. He has stayed in Paris a long time6 – I assume he’s wiser than I am, not drinking &c. But in it, though, I find something like my own Parisian moral fatigue. And I think that within a short time his temperament would faint away from sadness, tired of an idée fixe of seeking good if he continued much longer. Our sister told me in her last letter that Isaäcson might go to the Transvaal. My word, that could be better for him than Paris, but I’ll regret it on our account, for I have lots and lots of fellow-feeling for him, and would greatly desire to make his acquaintance personally. I’m planning to write to him again about his articles, and I’ll give him a portrait of myself as a souvenir. I think that this one could have been someone who could have married our sister. That would be better for him than this journalist’s life, and perhaps would get him back on his feet better. For I’m touched by the fact that one feels so much from what he says, that he’s a very suffering and very good person, happy when he can admire. This morning I began The diggers on a no. 30 canvas. Do you know that it might be interesting to try to do Millet’s drawings as paintings, that would be a very special collection of copies, 
         something like the works of Prévost , who copied little-known Goyas and Velázquez for Mr Doria. Perhaps I’d be more useful doing that than through my own painting. Mother wrote to me too with news of Cor. I worked on a study of the fever ward in the Arles hospital, and then having no canvas lately I’ve been taking long walks in all directions across the country – I’m beginning to feel more the wholeness of the countryside in which I live. Later I may also return time and again to the same Provençal subjects. What you say of Guillaumin is very true, he has found a true thing and he’s satisfied with what he’s found without embarking at random on dissimilar things, and that way he remains right and becomes stronger, always with these same very simple subjects. My word, he isn’t wrong, and I like this sincerity he has enormously. I’m hurrying to finish this letter, I had already begun to write to you four times13 without being able to finish. Ah, at the moment you yourself are fully in the midst of nature, since you write that Jo already feels her child quicken – it’s much more interesting even than landscape, and I’m very pleased that it has changed like this for you. How beautiful the Millet is, A child’s first steps!14 Handshake to you, to Isaäcson, my best regards above all to Jo. I’m going to work some more on The diggers, the days are very short. More soon. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Enclosed I’m sending you a list of colours I need as soon as possible. You gave me very great pleasure by sending me those Millets, I’m working on them zealously. I was growing flabby by dint of never seeing anything artistic, and this revives me. I’ve finished The evening2 and am working on The diggers3 and the man who’s putting his jacket on, no. 30 canvases, and The sower, smaller. The evening is in a range of violets and soft lilacs, with light from the lamp pale citron, then the orange glow of the fire and the man in red ochre. You will see it. It seems to me that doing painting after these Millet drawings is much rather to translate them into another language than to copy them. Apart from that I have a rain effect6 on the go, and an evening effect with tall pines.
   And also a leaf-fall. My health is very good – except often a lot of melancholy however – but I feel much much better than when I came here, and even better than in Paris. Also, as for the work the ideas are becoming firmer, it seems to me. But then I don’t quite know if you’d like what I’m doing now. For despite what you say in your previous letter, that the search for style often harms other qualities, the fact is that I feel myself greatly driven to seek style, if you like, but I mean by that a more manly and more deliberate drawing. If that will make me more like Bernard or Gauguin, I can’t do anything about it. But am inclined to believe that in the long run you’d get used to it. 
   For yes, one must feel the wholeness of a country – isn’t that what distinguishes a Cézanne from something else. And Guillaumin, whom you mention, he has so much style and a personal way of drawing. Anyway, I’ll do as I can. Now that most of the leaves have fallen the landscape looks more like the north, and then I really feel that if I went back to the north I would see it more clearly than before. Health is a big thing, and a lot depends on it, as regards work too. Fortunately those abominable nightmares no longer torment me. I hope to go to Arles in the next few days. I’d very much like Jo to see The evening, I think that I’ll send you a consignment shortly, but it’s drying very badly because of the dampness of the studio. Here the houses have scarcely any cellar or foundations, and one feels the damp more than in the north. At home they’ll have moved by now, I’ll add 6 canvases for them to the next consignment. Is it necessary to have them framed, perhaps not, for it isn’t worth it. Above all, don’t frame the studies I send you from time to time, that can be done later, pointless for them to take up too much room. 
   I’ve also done a canvas for Mr Peyron, a view of the house with a tall pine tree. I hope that your health and Jo’s continue to be good. I’m so happy that you’re no longer alone, and that everything’s more normal than before. Is Gauguin back, and what’s Bernard doing? More soon, I shake your hand firmly, and Jo’s, and our friends’, and believe me Ever yours, Vincent I’m trying to simplify the list of colours as much as possible13 – thus I very often use the ochres as in the old days. I know very well that the studies drawn with long, sinuous lines from the last consignment weren’t what they ought to become, however I dare urge you to believe that in landscapes one will continue to mass things by means of a drawing style that seeks to express the entanglement of the masses. Thus, do you remember Delacroix’s landscape, Jacob’s struggle with the angel? And there are others of his! For example the cliffs, and the very flowers you speak of sometimes. Bernard really has found perfect things in there. Anyway, don’t be too swift to adopt a prejudice against it. Anyway, you’ll see that there’s already more character in a large landscape with pines, red ochre trunks defined by a black line17 than in the previous ones. My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter, and am very glad that you write that Jo is staying well. The great event is nearing now, I think of you both very often. For you, when you write about seeing so many paintings that you would wish not to see any for a while, this clearly proves that you’ve had too many business worries. And then – yes there’s something in life other than paintings, and this something else one neglects and nature seems to avenge itself then, and besides, fate is bent on thwarting us. I think that in these circumstances one must keep to the paintings as much as duty demands but no more. As for the Vingtistes, here’s what I’d like to exhibit: 

1 and 2 
the two pendants of sunflowers2


3
The ivy, upright3


4
Orchard in blossom (the one Tanguy’s  


 
exhibiting at the moment, with poplars crossing the canvas)4


5
The red vineyard5


6
Wheatfield, rising sun, which I’m working


 
 on at the moment.


 Gauguin wrote me a very kind letter and speaks animatedly of De Haan and of their rough-and-ready life at the seaside.  Bernard also wrote to me, complaining about a heap of things while resigning himself like the good boy he is, but not happy at all; with all his talent, all his work, all his sobriety, it appears that home is often a hell for him.  Isaäcson’s letter gives me great pleasure, I enclose my reply which you will read – the ideas are beginning to link together a little more calmly, but as you’ll see from it I don’t know if I should continue to paint or leave painting alone.  If I continue, certainly I’m in agreement with you that perhaps it’s better to attack things with simplicity than to seek abstractions. 
    And I’m not an admirer of Gauguin’s Christ in the Garden of Olives for example, a croquis of which he sent me. Then as for Bernard’s, he promises me a photograph of it, I don’t know, but I fear that his biblical compositions will make me wish for something else. Lately I’ve seen women picking and gathering olives, no way for me to get a model, so I didn’t do anything about it. However now isn’t the moment to ask me to approve of friend G’s composition – and friend Bernard has probably never seen an olive tree. Now he therefore avoids conceiving the least idea of the possible and of the reality of things, and that isn’t the way to synthesize. No, never have I got involved in their Biblical interpretations. I said that Rembrandt and Delacroix had done this admirably, that I liked that even better than the primitives, but then stop. I don’t want to begin on that chapter again. If I remain here I wouldn’t try to paint a Christ in the Garden of Olives, but in fact the olive picking as it’s still seen today, and then giving the correct proportions of the human figure in it, that would perhaps make people think of it all the same. Before I’ve done more serious studies than I have up to now I don’t have the right to get involved in this. And then the Pre-Raphaelites11 went a long way in that category of ideas. When Millais painted his Light of the World it was serious in another way. Really, there’s no comparison. Not to mention Holman Hunt and others, Pinwell and Rossetti.  And then here there’s Puvis de Chavannes.  Now I’ll tell you that I’ve been to Arles and I saw Mr Salles, who handed me the rest of the money you sent him and the rest of what I’d handed over to him, that is, 72 francs. However, only around twenty francs remain in the cash-box with Mr Peyron at the moment, since down there I stocked myself up with colours and paid for the room where the furniture &c. is. Stayed there for 2 days, not yet knowing what to do next, it’s good to show oneself there from time to time so that the same story doesn’t start again with the people. At present no one there is hostile to me as far as I can tell, on the contrary, they were very friendly, and even gave me a warm welcome. And if I stayed in the area, little by little I’d have a chance to acclimatize myself, which isn’t easy for strangers and would have its uses for painting there. But first we’ll see a little if this journey might provoke another crisis. I almost dare hope not.  It’s often cold here too, however we’re a little more sheltered from the mistral by the mountains. And between times I keep working. I have several things to send you with the canvas for the Vingtistes. I’m waiting for that one to be dry.  If I’d known in time that there were trains from here to Paris at only 25 francs I would certainly have come. It’s only on going to Arles that I found this out, and it’s because of the expense that I haven’t done it – at the moment it would seem to me that in springtime it would however be good to come in any event to see the people and things of the north again. For this life here is terribly numbing, and in the long run I’d lose my energy. I had hardly dared hope that I would still be as well as is the case.  However, everything depends on whether this suits you or not, and I think it’s wise not to rush things. Perhaps by waiting a little we won’t even have need of the doctor at Auvers or the Pissarros. 
          If my health remains stable, then if while I’m working I again start to try to sell, exhibit, make exchanges, perhaps there’ll be some progress so as to be less of a burden to you on the one hand and to regain a little more zest on the other. For I don’t hide from you the fact that my stay here is very tiring on account of its monotony, and because the society of all these unfortunates, who do absolutely nothing, gets on one’s nerves.  But what can one do, one can’t have pretensions in my case, I already have too many as it is.  Gauguin says that they get models easily. That’s what I lack most here.  Bernard speaks to me of an exchange, you’re quite free to deal with this with him if he wishes and speaks to you about it. I’d really like that, besides the portrait of his grandmother, you should have a good thing of his. It appears he fancies the Berceuse.  I think that the 6 paintings for the Vingtistes will make an ensemble like this, the wheatfield will make a very good pendant to the orchard.  I’m dropping a line to Mr Maus to give him titles, as he asks in his letter.  Now, warm regards to Jo, and good handshake.  You must read the letter to Isaäcson, it complements this one. More soon.   Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, I have to thank you very much for a consignment of colours, which was also accompanied by an excellent woollen waistcoat. How kind you are to me, and how I’d like to be able to do something good in order to prove to you that I’d like to be less ungrateful. Your colours reached me at the right moment, for what I brought back from Arles2 is almost exhausted. The thing is, I’ve been working this month in the olive groves, for they’d driven me mad with their Christs in the garden, in which nothing is observed. Of course there’s no question of me doing anything from the Bible – and I’ve written to Bernard, and also to Gauguin, that I believed that thinking and not dreaming was our duty, that I was therefore astonished when looking at their work by the fact that they give way to that. For Bernard has sent me photos of his canvases. The thing about them is that they’re sorts of dreams and nightmares, that there’s some erudition there – one can see that it’s someone who’s mad about the primitives – but frankly the English Pre-Raphaelites5 did this much better, and then Puvis and Delacroix are much healthier than those Pre-Raphaelites. So this doesn’t leave me cold, but it gives me an uncomfortable feeling of a tumble rather than progress. Well, to shake this off, I’ve been messing about in the groves morning and evening on these bright and cold days, but in very beautiful, clear sunshine, and the result is 5 no. 30 canvases6 which, with the 3 studies of olive trees that you have, at least constitute an attack on the problem. The olive tree is variable like our willow or pollard in the north. You know that willows are very picturesque, despite the fact that it appears monotonous, it’s the tree typical of the country. Now what the willow is in our native country, the olive tree and the cypress have exactly the same importance here. What I’ve done is a rather harsh and coarse realism beside their abstractions, but it will nevertheless impart the rustic note, and will smell of the soil. How I’d like to see the studies from nature by Gauguin and Bernard, the latter tells me of portraits which doubtless would please me more. 
   I hope I’ll get used to working in the cold – in the morning there are very interesting effects of white frost and fog, and I still have the great desire to do for the mountains and for the cypresses what I’ve just done for the olive trees, have a really good go at them. The thing is, the olive tree and the cypress have rarely been painted, and from the point of view of placing the paintings this ought to go to England, I know well enough what they’re looking for over there. Whatever the case, I’m almost sure that in this way I’ll do something passable from time to time. As I said to Isaäcson, it’s really more and more my opinion that by working assiduously from nature, without saying to oneself in advance, I want to do this or that, by working as if one were making shoes, without artistic preoccupations, one won’t always do well, but on the days when one thinks about it the least one finds a subject that holds its own with the work of those who came before us. One learns to know a country that’s basically quite different from what it appears at first sight. On the contrary, one will say to oneself, I want to finish my paintings better, I want to do them with care; in the face of the difficulties of the weather, of changing effects, a heap of ideas like this finds itself reduced to being impracticable, and I end up resigning myself by saying, it’s experience and each day’s little bit of work alone that in the long run matures and enables one to do things that are more complete or more right. So slow, long work is the only road, and all ambition to be set on doing well, false. For one must spoil as many canvases as one succeeds with when one mounts the breach each morning. To paint, the tranquil, regulated life would therefore be absolutely necessary, and at present what can one do when one sees that Bernard, for example, is always put under pressure, pressure, pressure by his parents. He can’t do as he wants, and many others with him. One says to oneself, I shan’t paint any more, but what will one do then? Ah – a more expeditious painting process should be invented, less expensive than oil and yet durable. A painting... it will end up becoming as commonplace as a sermon, a painter like someone who’s a century behind the times. It’s a shame, though, that it should be so. Now if the painters had better understood Millet as a man – now some like Lhermitte and Roll have grasped him – things wouldn’t be so. One must work as hard and with as few pretensions as a peasant if one wants to last. 
   And instead of putting on grandiose exhibitions, it would have been better to address oneself to the common people, and work so that everyone may have paintings or reproductions at home, which are lessons like the work of Millet. I’m completely at the end of my canvas, and when you can please send me 10 metres. Then I’m going to attack the cypresses and the mountains. I think that this must be the centre of the work I’ve done here and there in Provence, and then we can conclude the stay here when it’s convenient. Which isn’t urgent, for Paris only distracts, after all. I don’t know, though, not always being a pessimist – I keep telling myself that I still have it in my heart to paint a bookshop one day with the shop window yellow-pink, in the evening, and the passers-by black – it’s such an essentially modern subject. Because it also appears such a figurative source of light. I say, that would be a subject that would look good between an olive grove and a wheatfield, the sowing of books, of prints. I have that very much in my heart to do, like a light in the darkness. Yes, there’s a way of seeing Paris as beautiful. But anyway, bookshops aren’t hares, and there’s no hurry, and I have a good will to work here for another year, which will probably be wiser. Mother must have been in Leiden for a good fortnight by now. I’ve delayed sending you the canvases for them9 because I’ll include them with the canvas of the wheatfield for the Vingtistes. Warm regards to Jo, she’s very good, continuing to be well. Thank you once again for the colours and for the woollen waistcoat, and good handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Yesterday I sent three packets by parcel post containing studies which I hope you’ll receive in good order. I really must thank you for the 10 metres of canvas, which have just arrived. Among the studies you’ll find the following, which are for our mother and sister. Olive trees2 – Bedroom3 – Reaper4 – Working with plough5 – Wheatfield with cypresses6 – Orchard in blossom7 – Portrait. The remainder is above all autumn studies9 and I think the best one is the yellow mulberry tree against a very blue sky. Then the study of the house and of the park, of which there are two variants. The studies on no. 30 canvases weren’t yet dry and will follow later. They’re giving me a lot of trouble, and sometimes I find them very ugly, sometimes they look good to me – perhaps you’ll have the same impression when you see them. There are a dozen of them, so it’s more substantial than what I’ve just sent. In spite of the cold I’m continuing to work outside up to now, and I think that it’s good for me and for the work. The last study I did is a view of the village – where people were at work – under enormous plane trees – repairing the pavements. So there are piles of sand, stones and the gigantic tree-trunks – the yellowing foliage, and here and there glimpses of a house-front and little figures.
   I often think of you and Jo, but with a feeling as if there was an enormous distance from here to Paris and as if it were years since I saw you. I hope that your health is good, for myself I can’t complain, I feel absolutely normal, so to speak, but without ideas for the future, and truly I don’t know what it’s going to be, and perhaps I’m avoiding going into this question deeply, sensing that I can do nothing about it. I’ve finished, or almost, the copy of The diggers too. You’ll see that there are no more impastos in the large studies. I prepare the thing with sorts of washes with spirits, and then proceed with touches or hatchings of colour with spaces between them. This imparts atmosphere and uses less paint. If I want to send this letter off today I must hurry, so handshake in thought and warm regards to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for your last letter, I’m very glad that you and Jo are in good health, and very often think of you both. It’s very interesting what you tell me about a publication of coloured lithographs with a text on Monticelli, honestly, that gives me very great pleasure, and I’d be very curious to see them one day. I hope that he’ll reproduce in colour the bouquet you have, for that’s a thing of the first order as regards colour. One day I’d very much like to do a print or two myself in this vein after my canvases. Thus I’m working on a painting at the moment, women picking olives, which would lend itself to it, I think. These are the colours: the field is violet and further away yellow ochre, the olive trees with bronze trunks have grey-green foliage, the sky is entirely pink, and 3 small figures pink also. The whole in a very discreet range. It’s a canvas I’m working on from memory after the study of the same size done on the spot, because I want a far-off thing like a vague memory softened by time. There are only two notes, pink and green, which harmonize, neutralize each other, oppose each other. I’ll probably do 2 or three repetitions of it, for in fact it’s the result of a half-dozen studies of olive trees. I think it likely that I’ll do hardly any more things in impasto, it’s the result of the calm life of seclusion I’m leading, and I feel I’m better for it. Fundamentally I’m not as violent as that, anyway I feel more myself in calmness. You’ll perhaps also see it in the canvas for the Vingtistes that I sent yesterday, the Wheatfield with rising sun. You’ll receive the Bedroom at the same time. I’ve also added two drawings to them. I’m curious to know what you’ll say about the Wheatfield, you may have to look at it for a while perhaps. However, I hope that you’ll write to me soon whether it’s arrived in good order if you find a free half hour next week. 
   I’d be completely resigned to staying here next year too, because I think the work will get along a little. And through the prolonged stay, I feel the country here differently from the first place encountered – good ideas are now germinating a little and should be allowed to develop. And thus I wouldn’t be so very far removed from the idea of going to look for something in the land of Tartarin. I have a great desire to do more of both the cypresses and the Alpilles, and often going on long walks in all directions I’ve noted many subjects and know good places for when the fine days come. Then, from the point of view of expenditure there would hardly be any advantage in moving I think, and moving makes the success of the work all the more doubtful. I’ve received another very nice letter from Gauguin, a letter thoroughly impregnated with the proximity of the sea, I think he must be doing fine, rather savage things. You tell me not to give myself too many worries and that better days will come again for me. I’d say that these better days have already begun for myself, when I glimpse the possibility of completing, to some extent, the work in such a way that you’ll have a series of Provençal studies done with feeling which will hold up, this is what I hope, with our far-off memories of youth in Holland, and thus I’m treating myself by redoing the olive trees again for our mother and sister. And if I could one day prove that I wouldn’t impoverish the family, that would relieve me. For at present I always have a great deal of remorse in spending money that doesn’t come back. But as you say, patience and working is the only chance of getting out of that. However, I often tell myself that if I’d done like you, if I’d stayed at the Goupils’, if I’d restricted myself to selling paintings, I would have done better. For in the trade, if one doesn’t produce oneself one makes others produce, now that so many artists need support among the dealers and only rarely find it. 
   The money that was with Mr Peyron has run out, and a few days ago he even gave me 10 francs in advance. And in the course of the month I’ll certainly need another ten, and at New Year I’d consider it right to give something to the servant lads who work here, and to the porter, which will make another ten francs or so. As regards winter clothing, what I have isn’t very much, as you’ll understand, but it’s warm enough and so we can wait until spring with that. If I go out it’s to work, so then I put on the most worn-out things I have, and I have a velvet waistcoat and trousers for here. In the spring, if I’m here, I’m planning to go and make a few paintings in Arles as well, and if I get something new around then, that will suffice. I’m sending you enclosed an order for canvas and colours, but I still have some and it can wait until next month if this one is too heavily burdened already. I remember the painting by Manet you speak of. As to figure, the portrait of a man by Puvis de Chavannes has always remained an ideal for me, an old man reading a yellow novel, with beside him a rose and watercolour brushes in a glass of water – and the portrait of a lady that he had in the same exhibition, a woman already old but completely as Michelet felt, that there’s no such thing as an old woman. These are consolatory things, to see modern life as bright despite its inevitable sadnesses. Last year around this time I was certainly not thinking that I would recover as much as this. 
   Give my kind regards to Isaäcson if you see him, and to Bernard. I regret not being able to send the olive trees one of these days, but it’s drying so badly that I’ll have to wait. I think it’ll be a good course of action to have our sister come in January. Ah, if that one could get married, that would be a good thing. I shake your hand warmly in thought, I’m going to work some more outside, the mistral’s blowing. It usually dies down by the time the sun’s about to set, then there are superb effects of pale citron skies, and desolate pines cast their silhouettes into relief against it with effects of exquisite black lace. At other times the sky is red, at other times a tone that’s extremely delicate, neutral, still pale lemon but neutralized by delicate lilac. I have an evening effect of a pine again against pink and green-yellow. Anyway, shortly you’ll see these canvases, of which the first, the Wheatfield, has just left. More soon, I hope, warm regards to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent My dear brother, Thanks very much for your letter of 22 Dec. containing a 50-franc note; first I wish you and Jo a happy New Year and am sorry for having perhaps made you anxious, quite unwittingly nonetheless, for Mr Peyron must have written to you that my mind has once again been very disturbed.  At the moment of writing to you I haven’t yet seen Mr Peyron, so I don’t know if he’s written anything to you about my paintings. He came to tell me while I was ill that he’d received news from you, and if I wanted to exhibit my paintings, yes or no. So I told him that I’d much rather not exhibit them. Which had no justification, and so I hope that they’ve gone off all the same. But anyway, I regret not having been able to see Mr P. today to find out what he wrote to you. Anyway, this doesn’t appear very important to me on the whole, since you say that they only go off on 3 January, you’ll still receive this in time. What a misfortune for Gauguin, that child falling out of the window and he unable to be there, I often think of him, what troubles that one has, despite his energy and so many matchless qualities.
   I consider it perfect that our sister is coming to help you when Jo has her confinement. May it go well – I think a great deal of you both, I can assure you. Now what you say about my work certainly is agreeable to me, but I still think of this bloody profession in which one is caught as if in a net and in which one becomes less practical than others. Anyway, useless alas to fret about this – and one must do as one can. Odd that I’d worked perfectly calmly on canvases that you’ll soon see, and that all at once, without any reason, the confusion took hold of me again. If Gauguin was in too much of a fix I think I’d again suggest to him going to live together where he’s staying, as we’d be able to feed the two of us on what it costs here for myself alone. I don’t know what Mr Peyron is going to advise me to do, but while taking account of what he’ll tell me I think 
   that he’ll dare less than ever to pronounce on the possibility of me living like before. It’s to be feared that these crises will recur. But it’s not at all a reason for not trying a to distract oneself a little. For the crowding together of all these lunatics in this old cloister is, I believe, becoming a dangerous thing in which one risks losing all the good sense one might still have retained. Not that I’m set on this or that by preference, I’ve become used to life here, but mustn’t forget to try the opposite a little. Whatever the case, you can see that I’m writing to you with relative calm. Very interesting what you write about Mr Lauzet’s visit. I think that when I send you the canvases that are still here he’ll certainly come back once more, and if I were there 
   I think I’d also start doing lithographs. Perhaps the canvases in question would fit the bill for Reid. Above all I mustn’t waste my time, I’m going to set to work again as soon as Mr Peyron will allow it, and if he doesn’t allow it then I’ll make a clean break with here. It’s that that keeps me still relatively balanced, and again I have a whole lot of ideas for new paintings. Ah, while I was ill, damp, melting snow was falling, I got up in the night to look at the landscape – never, never has nature appeared so touching and so sensitive to me. The relatively superstitious ideas people have here about painting make me more melancholy than I could tell you sometimes, because there’s always basically some truth in it that as a man a painter is too absorbed by what his eyes see and doesn’t have enough mastery of the rest of his life.
   If you saw the letter Gauguin wrote me last time4 you’d be touched by how upright his thoughts are, and for such a strong man to be almost immobilized is an unhappy thing. And Pissarro too, Guillaumin the same. What a business, what a business. I’ve just received a letter from Mother, and from Wil too. In the next few days you’ll have many anxieties with Jo at times, and a bad time to get through. But these are things without which life wouldn’t be life, and that makes one solemn. It’s a really good idea that Wil’s going to be there. As for me, don’t worry too much. I’m calmly defending myself against the illness, and I think that I’ll be able to get back to work one of these days.
   And this will be another lesson to me to try and work straightforwardly and without too many reservations that trouble the consciousness. A painting, a book, these mustn’t be despised, and if it’s my duty to do this, I mustn’t wish for something else. It’s time for this letter to go off, thanks again for yours, and good handshake to you and Jo, believe me Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Yesterday I was pleasantly surprised by a visit from Mr Salles who, I believe, had had a letter from you. I was completely well when he came so we were able to talk calmly. But I’m most confused that he should have put himself out for me, the more so because I hope that I’ve regained my presence of mind for a while. For the moment it seems to me that the best thing will be to carry on here. I’ll see what Mr Peyron says when I have a chance to speak to him; he’ll probably say that he absolutely cannot guarantee anything in advance, which seems quite right to me. Today I’m dispatching a few canvases, the following: 

Ploughed field with background of mountains2 ­ it´s


 
the same field of the reaper from this summer3 and can be a pendant to it; I think that one will set off the other. 


The ravine. This is the study done on a day when the


 
mistral was blowing ­ I had wedged my easel in place with large stones4 ­ the painting of this isn´t dry, it´s in a tauter drawing style,   and there´s more suppressed passion and it has more colour.
      This can go with another study of mountains, summer effect, with a road in the foreground and a black hovel.



Women picking olives – I´d intended this painting for


 
our mother and sister so that they might have something a little studied. I also have a repetition of it8 for you, and the study (more coloured with more solemn tones) from nature.


The fields. Fields of young wheat with background


 
of lilac mountains and yellowish sky. 


Olive trees. Orange and green sunset sky11 (there´s 


 
also a variant of it here with figures).
      ditto, neutral effect.
      ditto       ,,          ,,.



The tall plane trees, the main street or boulevard


 
of St-Rémy, study from nature14 ­ I have a repetition of it here which is perhaps more finished.




Copy 
after Millet ,
The diggers.


 
ditto
The evening.

 


I was forgetting the rain.


 Please don’t look at them without putting them on stretching frames and framing them in white. That’s to say, you’ll remove the nails from other canvases and mount these on the stretching frames, one by one if you like, to appreciate the effect. For the colourings absolutely need to be set off by the white frame to judge the ensemble. Thus the rain, the grey olive trees, one can scarcely see them without the frame. This will somewhat fill the hole left by the canvases that have gone off to the Vingtistes – you must ask Tanguy to remove the nails from other canvases and to mount these on stretching frames so that they dry all the way through. In your previous letter19 you talk of Hugo’s drawings – I’ve just seen a volume of Michelet’s (illustrated) Histoire de France. I saw admirable drawings in it by Vierge which were completely like something by Victor Hugo, astonishing things. Do you know that? When you see Mr Lauzet ask him if he knows them, there’s also a resemblance with Hervier’s talent, but more complete, with 
   more dramatic figures and effects – it also resembles the illustrations for The life of Frederick the Great by Menzel. Most curious. I think that Vierge has also gone to Charenton, but how that fellow has worked. At one time Boggs had a magnificent wood engraving of his, probably published by L’Illustration, Sea-bathing – a crowd of men and women24 – drawing in the manner of Doré, who one day did precisely the same subject very well on a page also published by L’Illustration25 – but then with Vierge there’s Daumier’s rich execution in full. I hope that Jo’s health and yours are good, and that you no longer have any anxiety on my account. Write to me if you can soon after receiving the canvases. Good handshake in thought to you and your wife. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your letter. Although I just wrote to you yesterday I’m replying immediately. The fact is that I’ve never worked more calmly than in my latest canvases – you’re going to receive a few at the same time as this letter, I hope. For the moment I’ve been caught unawares by a great discouragement. But since this attack ended in a week, what’s the good of telling oneself that it can in fact recur? First we don’t know, nor can we foresee how and in what form. So let’s continue the work as much as possible as if nothing were amiss. I’ll soon have the opportunity to go outside when the weather isn’t too cold, and then I’d rather like to try to finish the work undertaken here. To give an idea of Provence it’s vital to do a few more canvases of cypresses and mountains. The ravine2 and another canvas of mountains with a path in the foreground3 are types of this. And especially the Ravine that I still have here because it isn’t dry. As well as the view of the park too, with the pines. It took me all the time to observe the character of the pines, cypresses &c. in the pure air here, the lines that don’t change and which one finds again at every step. It’s perfectly true that last year the crisis recurred at various times – but then, too, it was precisely by working that the normal state returned little by little. It will probably be the same on this occasion too. So act as if nothing were amiss, for we can do absolutely nothing about it. 
   And what would be infinitely worse is to let myself slide into the state of my companions in misfortune who do nothing all day, week, month, year, as I’ve told you many times and repeated again to Mr Salles, making him promise never to recommend this asylum. The work makes me retain a little presence of mind still, and makes it possible that I can get out one day. At the moment I have the paintings ripe in my mind, I see in advance the places that I still want to do in the coming months. Why would I change means of expression. Once I’m back from here, let’s suppose, we’ll have to see a little if there’s really nothing to be done with my canvases, I would have a certain number of mine, a certain number of other people’s, and perhaps I’d try to do a little dealing. I don’t know in advance, but I see no reason not to do more of the canvases here that I’ll need were I to get out of here. Once again, I can foresee absolutely nothing, I see no way out, but I also see that my stay here cannot be prolonged indefinitely. Then, in order not to hurry anything 
   or break it off suddenly, I’d wish to continue as usual as long as I’m here. Yesterday I sent 2 canvases to Marseille, i.e. I made a present of them to my friend Roulin, a white farmhouse among the olive trees7 and a wheatfield with a background of lilac mountains and a dark tree, as in the large canvas I sent you. And I’ve given Mr Salles a little canvas with pink and red geraniums on a completely black background, like I used to do in Paris. As regards the money you sent, 10 francs of it were owing to Mr Peyron, which he’d advanced me last month, I gave 20 francs in New Year’s gifts, and I took 10 for the postage on the canvases and other expenses, so 10 francs still remain in the cash-box. At the moment I’ve just done a little portrait of one of the lads from here which he wanted to send to his mother, that’s to say I’ve already started work again, and Mr Peyron would probably not have allowed me to if he saw any obstacles there. What he said to me was ‘let’s hope that this doesn’t happen again’ – so absolutely the same thing as always. He talked to me with great kindness and these things scarcely surprise him, but since there’s no ready remedy 
   it’s time and circumstances alone that can perhaps have influence. I’d very much like to go to Arles one more time, not immediately, but towards the end of February for example, first to see friends, which always cheers me up, and then to test whether I’m capable of risking the journey to Paris. Am very pleased that our sister has come. Warm regards to her and to Jo, and as for you and me, let’s not worry ourselves. In any event, it didn’t last as long as the other year, and so we can still hope that little by little time will make all of this pass. Well, be of good heart, and good handshake Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo, Thanks for your last letter, I hope that Wil has recovered from her indisposition and that it was no more serious than you say. Thanks very much, too, for the consignment of canvases and colours, which has just arrived. I have enough subjects for paintings in my head for when the weather permits me to work outside. What you say about the copy after Millet, The evening, pleases me. The more I think about it the more I find that there’s justification for trying to reproduce things by Millet that he didn’t have the time to paint in oils. So working either on his drawings or the wood engravings, it’s not copying pure and simple that one would be doing. It is rather translating into another language, the one of colours, the impressions of chiaroscuro and white and black. In this way I’ve just finished the three other ‘times of the day’ after the wood engravings by Lavieille. It took me 
   a lot of time and a lot of trouble. For you know that this summer I’ve already done The labours of the fields. Now these reproductions – you’ll see them one day – I haven’t sent, because more than the former ones they were gropings, but they have, however, served me well for The times of the day. Later, who knows, perhaps I could do lithographs of them. I’m curious as to what Mr Lauzet will say about them. They’ll take a good month more to dry, the last three, but once you have them you’ll clearly see that they were done through a most profound and sincere admiration for Millet. Then, even if they’re criticized one day or despised as copies, it will remain no less true that it’s justifiable to try to make Millet’s work more accessible to the ordinary general public. Now I’m going to talk to you again about what I think we could do for the future so as to have fewer expenses. At Montevergues there’s an asylum5 where one of the employees here used to be a warder. He tells me that there they only pay 22 sous 
   a day, and that then the patients are even dressed by the establishment. Then they’re put to work on the lands that belong to the house, and there’s also a forge, a carpenter’s workshop &c. Once they’d got to know me a little I don’t think I’d be forbidden to paint, then for one thing there’s still the fact that it’s less expensive, and second, that one can work at something. So with good will one isn’t unfortunate there, nor is one to be pitied too much. Now, even leaving Montevergues aside, returning to Holland, aren’t there establishments in our native country where people work too and where it isn’t expensive, and which one has the right to benefit from, while I’m not too sure if there might not be a slightly higher rate at Montevergues for foreigners, and above all admission difficulties which it’s better to avoid. I must tell you that it reassures me a little to tell myself that we can simplify things if we need to. For at present it costs too much, and the idea of going to Paris then to the country, having no other resource to combat the expenses than painting, means manufacturing paintings that come quite expensive. You must talk about it one day with C.M., should you see him, and tell him frankly that I’ll willingly try to do what’s for the best, that I have no preference whatsoever. 
   I saw Mr Peyron again this morning, he says that he’s allowing me complete freedom to distract myself, and that I must react against the melancholy as much as I can, which I’m gladly doing. Now, it’s a good reaction to ponder resolutely, and it’s also a duty. Now, you understand that in an establishment where the patients work in the fields I would find hosts of subjects for paintings and drawings, and that I wouldn’t be at all unhappy there. Anyway, it’s necessary to ponder while we have the time to ponder. I think that if I came to Paris I wouldn’t do anything but draw Greek casts again at first, because I must always keep on studying. For the moment I feel very well, and I hope that it’ll remain like that. And I even have hopes that it will be dispelled even more if I return to the north. Just mustn’t forget that a broken pitcher is a broken pitcher, and so I have no right at all to entertain pretensions. I tell myself that at home in Holland people always value painting more or less, that in an establishment they’d hardly make difficulties about letting me do it. Now, it would still be a lot, however, to have the opportunity to occupy oneself over and above painting, and it would cost less. Hasn’t the countryside and working there always been to our taste? And aren’t we a little indifferent, you as much as I, to the life of a big city? I must tell you that at moments I still feel too well to be idle, and in Paris I fear I wouldn’t do anything good.
   So when you see C.M., and it seems very likely to me that he will indeed drop by in February to see the little one you’re expecting, let’s try a little to act firmly. I can and I indeed want to earn some money with my painting, and we ought to ensure that my expenses don’t exceed its value, and even that the money spent comes back little by little. Well, that can be done with energy, and it’s a duty. With good behaviour I think that one can arrive at some relative freedom, even in an establishment for the insane. And it seems to me that the attacks have been too frequent, too decisive, to cease considering myself as ill. To talk of something else – I can’t manage to see the south like the good Italians, Fortuny, Jiménez, Tapiró7 and others – how on the contrary it makes me see more with my northern eyes! It isn’t, believe me, that I wouldn’t wish to be able to live like before, without this preoccupation with health. Anyway, we’ll make the attempt once but probably not twice in the spring if it goes away completely.
   Today I took the ten francs that were still with Mr Peyron. When I go to Arles I’ll have to pay 3 months’ rent on the room where my furniture is. That’ll be in February. This furniture, it seems to me, will be of use, if not to me then to another painter wanting to settle in the country. Wouldn’t it be wiser, in the event of leaving here, to send it to Gauguin, who’ll probably spend more time in Brittany, than to you, who’ll have nowhere to put it. This is another thing we need to consider in time. I think that in giving up two very old, heavy chests of drawers to someone, I could exempt myself from paying the remainder of the rent and perhaps the packing costs. They cost me around thirty francs. I’ll drop a line to Gauguin and De Haan to ask if they’re planning to stay in Brittany and if they’d like me to send the furniture, and then if they want 
   me to come too. I won’t commit myself to anything, only say that I’m very probably not staying here. This week I’m going to start on Millet’s ‘Snow-covered field’9 and ‘First steps’10 in the same format as the others. Then there’ll be 6 canvases forming a series, and I assure you that I’ve worked on them, these last three of the ‘Times of the day’, with much thought to calculate the colour. You see, these days there are so many people who don’t feel made for the public but who support and consolidate what others do. Those who translate books, for example. The engravers, the lithographers. Take Vernier, for example, and Lerat. So that’s to say that I don’t hesitate to make copies. If I had the leisure to travel, how I’d like to copy the works of Giotto, this painter who would be as modern as Delacroix if he weren’t primitive, and who’s so different from the other primitives. I haven’t seen much of his work, though. But there’s one who is consolatory. So what I’m pondering doing in painting is Daumier’s Drinkers13
   and Régamey’s Penitentiary. You’ll find them in among the wood engravings. I’m busy with the Millets for the moment, but this is to say that I’ll find no lack of things to work on. Thus even half locked up I’ll be able to occupy myself for a long time. What the Impressionists have found in colour will develop even more, but there’s a link that many forget which links this to the past, and I’ll make efforts to show that I have little belief in a rigorous separation between the Impressionists and the others. I find it a very happy thing that in this century there have been painters like Millet, Delacroix, Meissonier, who cannot be surpassed. For although we don’t like Meissonier as much as certain individuals do, there’s no getting away from it, when one sees his Readers, his Halt16 and so many other paintings – that really is something. And then one’s leaving aside his strongest point, i.e. military painting, because we like that less than the fields. Nevertheless, to be fair we must say that what he’s done cannot be surpassed or changed. Once again I hope that our sister has recovered. Warm regards to all. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Today I’ve just received your good news that you’re a father at last, that the most critical moment has passed for Jo, finally that the little one is well. It does me, too, more good and gives me more pleasure than I could express in words. Bravo – and how pleased Mother is going to be. I also received a quite long and very serene letter from her the day before yesterday. Finally what I’ve certainly hoped for so much for a long time has happened. No need to tell you that I’ve often thought of the two of you the past few days, and it touched me greatly that Jo still had the kindness to write to me the night before. How brave and calm she is in her danger, that touched me greatly. Well this contributes a great deal to making me forget these last few days when I was ill, then I no longer know where I am and my mind wanders. I was extremely surprised by the article on my paintings that you sent me, no need to tell you that I hope to go on thinking that I don’t paint like that, but rather I do see from it how I ought to paint. For the article is quite right in the sense that it indicates the gap to be filled, and I think that basically the writer writes it rather to guide not only me but also the other Impressionists, and even rather to make the breach in the right place. So he proposes a collective self, as ideal for the others as it is to me. He tells me simply that there’s something good here and there, if you like, in my very imperfect work as well, and there’s the consolatory side which I appreciate and which I hope I’m grateful for. Only it must be understood that I don’t have a strong enough back to carry out a job like that, and by concentrating the article on me, no need to tell you how I feel mired in flattery, and in my opinion it’s as exaggerated as what 
   a certain article by Isaäcson said on your account about you, that at present artists declined to argue, and that a serious movement was silently being created in the little shop on boulevard Montmartre. I admit that it’s difficult to say, to express oneself otherwise – just as one can’t paint as one sees – and it’s therefore not to criticize Isaäcson’s boldness or that of the other critic, but as regards us, well, we’re posing a little for the model, and my word, that’s a duty and a job like any other. So if you or I were to gain some reputation or other, it’s a matter of trying to retain a certain calm, and if possible presence of mind. Why not say, with more reason, what he says about my sunflowers6 about Quost’s magnificent and so-complete Hollyhocks and about his yellow irises, about Jeannin’s splendid peonies? And you, like me, foresee that being praised must have its other side, its reverse of the coin. But gladly I’m very grateful for the article, or rather ‘glad at heart’, as the revue song has it, since one can need it as one can truly need a medal. Then an article like that has its own merit as a critical work of art, as such I consider it worthy of respect, and the writer must use exalted tones, synthesize his conclusions &c. But right from the start we must think of not putting your young family too much into the artistic environment. Old Goupil10 ran his household well in the Paris undergrowth, and I think that you’ll still think of him very often. Things have changed so much, for today his cold aloofness would be shocking, but his strength 
   to weather so many storms, that though was something. Gauguin proposed, very vaguely it’s true, founding a studio in his name, he, De Haan and I, but said that first he’s pursuing his Tonkin project vigorously, and he appears to have cooled about continuing to paint, I don’t know exactly why. And he’s the sort of man who would scarper to Tonkin, indeed, he has a certain need for expansion and finds the artist’s life – and to an extent he’s right – a mean one. With his experiences of several journeys, what can one say to him? So I hope that he’ll feel that you and I are indeed his friends without counting on us too much, which he doesn’t anyway. He writes with a lot of reserve, more serious than the other year. I’ve just written a line to Russell once again to remind him about Gauguin a little, for I know that Russell is very serious and strong as a man. And if I got back together with G., then we’d have need of Russell. Gauguin and Russell are people with a rustic background; wild no, but with a certain innate gentleness of the far-off fields, probably much more than you or I, that’s how I find them. One must – it is true – believe in it a little from time to time in order to see it. If, for myself, I wanted to continue, let’s call it translating certain pages of Millet, then in order to prevent people, not criticizing me, I couldn’t care about that, but bothering or obstructing me under the pretext that I’m manufacturing copies – then among the artists I need people like Russell or Gauguin to carry this task to a successful conclusion, to make something serious of it. To do the things by Millet that you sent, for example, the choice of which I consider completely right – I have scruples of conscience, and I took the pile of photographs and I sent them 
   unhesitatingly to Russell so that I shouldn’t see them again until I’d thought long and hard about it. I don’t want to do it before first having heard something of your opinion, then also that of certain others on those that you’ll soon receive. Without that I’d have scruples of conscience, a fear that it might be plagiarism. And not now, but in a few months, I’ll try to get Russell’s honest opinion about the usefulness of the thing. In any case, Russell has outbursts, he gets angry, he says something true, and that’s what I need sometimes. You know that I found the Virgin15 so dazzling that I didn’t dare look. Immediately I felt a – ‘not yet’. Now the illness makes me very sensitive, and for the moment I don’t feel capable of continuing these ‘translations’ when it would involve such masterpieces. I’m stopping with the sower, which is in progress and isn’t coming along as would be desirable. However, being ill, I thought a lot about continuing this work, and that when I do it I do it calmly, you’ll see it soon when I send the five or 6 finished canvases. I hope that Mr Lauzet will come, I very much want to make his acquaintance. I trust in his opinion when he says that it’s Provence, there he touches on the difficulty, and like the other fellow he points out a thing to be done rather than one done. The landscapes with the cypresses! Ah, that wouldn’t be easy. Aurier feels it too when he says that even black is a colour, and about their flame-like aspect. I’m thinking of it but I don’t dare do it either, and say like Isaäcson, who is cautious, that I don’t yet feel that we’ve reached that point. It requires a certain dose of inspiration, a ray from on high21 which doesn’t belong to us, to do beautiful things. When I’d done those sunflowers I was seeking the contrary and yet the equivalent, and I said, it’s the cypress. I’m stopping there – I’m a little anxious about a woman friend who is still ill, it seems, and to whom I’d like to go, she’s the one whose portrait I did in yellow and black, and she had changed so much. It’s nervous crises and the complications of a premature change of life, very difficult in short. She looked like an old grandfather last time. I had promised to come back in a fortnight and was taken ill again myself. Anyway, for me the good news you’ve told me and that article and a heap of things mean that I’m personally feeling completely well today. Now in thought I remain with you all as I finish my letter. May Jo long remain for us all that she is. Now as for the little one, why then don’t you call him Theo in memory of our father, that would certainly give me so much pleasure. Handshake. Ever yours, Vincent I’m sorry too that Mr Salles didn’t find you. Thanks again to Wil for her kind letter, I’d have liked to reply to it today but I’ll put it back until a few days from now, tell her that Mother has written me another long letter from Amsterdam. How happy she’s going to be too. If you see him, for the time being thank Mr Aurier very much for his article, naturally I’ll send you a line for him, and a study. My dear Theo, I was in the middle of writing to you to send you the reply for Mr Aurier when your letter arrived. Am very pleased that Jo and the newborn are well and that she expects to be able to get up in a few days from now. Then what you write about our sister also interests me a great deal. I consider that she was lucky to see Degas at his home. I still think that she would above all make a good doctor’s wife. Anyway, one can’t exactly force these things, nevertheless it’s good to have one’s eyes open if the opportunity were to present itself. And so Gauguin has come back to Paris – I’m going to copy my reply to Mr Aurier to send it to him, and you can let him read the article from the Mercure. For really I consider that one should say things like that about Gauguin, and about me nothing except very secondarily. Gauguin wrote to me that he’d exhibited in Denmark and that this exhibition had been very successful. To me it seems a shame that he didn’t continue here a bit longer. The two of us together would have worked better than myself all alone this year. And at present we’d have a little cottage of our own to stay in and work, and could even accommodate others. Did you notice in that newspaper you sent me an article on the fruitfulness of certain artists. Of Corot, Rousseau, Dupré &c.;4 do you remember how many times when Reid was there that we talked about that, even of the necessity to produce a lot. And that shortly after I came to Paris I said to you that before I had two hundred canvases I wouldn’t be able to do anything. What would appear to some people to be working too fast is in reality completely the ordinary run of things, the normal state of regular production, considering that a painter must work really just as hard as a shoemaker, for example. 
   Would it not be a good idea to send Reid, and perhaps also Tersteeg, or rather C.M., a copy of Aurier’s article? The thing is that it seems to me that we ought to take advantage of it to try to place something in Scotland, either now or later. I think you’ll like the canvas for Mr Aurier, it’s in terribly thick impasto and worked like certain Monticellis, I’ve kept it for almost a year. But I consider that I must try to give him something good for that article, which is in itself a very artistic thing; and it really serves us well for the day when we, like everyone, will be obliged to try and recover what the paintings cost. Everything beyond that leaves me quite cold, but recovering the money it costs to produce, that’s the very condition of being able to continue. For the Impressionists’ exhibition in March7 I hope to send you a few more canvases which are drying at the moment. If they didn’t arrive in time you would have to make a choice from those that are at père Tanguy’s. I’ve tried to copy Daumier’s Drinkers8 and Doré’s Penitentiary, it’s very difficult. In the next few days I hope to begin on Delacroix’s Good Samaritan10 and Millet’s Woodcutter. Aurier’s article would encourage me, if I dared let myself go, to risk emerging from reality more and making a kind of tonal music with colour, as some Monticellis are. But the truth is so dear to me, trying to create something true also, anyway I think, I think I still prefer to be a shoemaker than to be a musician, with colours. 
   In any event, trying to remain true is perhaps a remedy to combat the illness that still continues to worry me. Lately my health is quite good, however, and I’d dare to believe that if I were to spend a while with you that would have a lot of effect upon me to counteract the influence that the company I have here necessarily exerts. But it seems to me that there’s no hurry about this, and that we must consider calmly if this is the moment to spend money on the journey. Perhaps by sacrificing the journey one could be useful to Gauguin or Lauzet. A few days ago I bought a suit that cost me 35 francs, I must pay for it towards the end of March. With this I’ll have sufficient for the year, for when I came here I also bought a suit for around 35 francs, and it has served me all year. But I’ll need a pair of shoes and a few pairs of drawers in March as well. All things considered, life here isn’t very expensive, I think that in the north one would spend rather more. And that’s why – even if I came to you for a while – the best policy might still be to continue the work here. I don’t know – and either is good to me – but we mustn’t hurry to move. And don’t you think that in Antwerp, if we put Gauguin’s plan into practice, one would have to maintain a certain rank, furnish a studio, in short do as the majority of established Dutch painters do? It’s not as simple as it appears, and would fear for him as well as for myself a regular siege by the established artists, and he would have the same story as he had before in Denmark.
   Anyway, we’d have to begin to say to ourselves that it’s still through the same procedure that the established painters can cause troubles for adventurers, as we’d be in Antwerp, and even oblige them to decamp. And as for the dealers there, we mustn’t count on them at all. The academy there is better, and they work more vigorously there than in Paris. And then Gauguin is still in Paris at the moment, his reputation is holding up there, and if he leaves for Antwerp he could find that it’s rather difficult to come back to Paris. Going to Antwerp I would fear for Gauguin rather than for myself, for naturally I can get by in Flemish, I resume the studies of peasants I began before and abandoned with much regret – there’s no need to tell you that I have a great love of the Kempen. But I foresee that for him the battle could be very tough. I think that you’ll tell him the pros and cons of this absolutely as I would tell him, I’ll write to him one of these days, especially to send him the reply to Mr Aurier’s article, and I’d think that if he wanted we could still work here together if his steps to find a position were to come to nothing. But he’s skilful, and perhaps he’ll come through it in Paris itself, and if he holds on there for his reputation he does well, for he always has this, that he was the first one of all to work in the heart of a tropical land. And one will necessarily come back to that matter. Above all, give him my warm regards, and if he wants he can take the repetitions of the Sunflowers16 and the repetition of the Berceuse17 in exchange for something of his that would give you pleasure. If I came to Paris I would have to rework several canvases done in the beginning here, I wouldn’t have any lack of work then. Warm regards to Jo, and good handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. Please send the enclosed letter to Mr Aurier after you’ve read it. My dear Theo, Today I wanted to try and read the letters that had come for me, but I wasn’t yet clear-headed enough to be able to understand them. However, I’m trying to answer you straightaway, and am hoping that it will lift within a few days from now. Above all I hope that you’re well, and your wife and your child. Don’t worry about me, even if it should last a little longer, and write the same thing to those at home and give them my warm regards. Warm regards to Gauguin, who wrote me a letter for which I thank him very much, I’m terribly bored but must try to be patient. Once again warm regards to Jo and to her little one, and handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent 
   I’m picking up this letter again to try and write, it will come little by little, it’s just that my mind has been so affected – without pain, it’s true – but totally stupefied. I must tell you that there are – as far as I can judge – others who have this like me; who having worked during a period of their life are reduced to powerlessness even so. One doesn’t easily learn anything good between four walls, that’s understandable, but nevertheless it’s true that there are also people who can no longer be left at liberty as if they had nothing wrong with them. And so I almost or entirely despair of myself. Perhaps, perhaps I would indeed get better in the country for a time. Work was going well, the last canvas of the branches in blossom, you’ll see that it was perhaps the most patiently worked, best thing I had done, painted with calm and a greater sureness of touch. And the next day done for like a brute. Difficult to understand things like that, but alas, that’s how it is. I have a great desire to get back to my work, though, but Gauguin also writes that he, who is nevertheless robust, also despairs of being able to continue. And isn’t it true that we often see the story of artists like that. So, my poor brother, take things as they are, don’t grieve on my account, it will encourage me and support me more than you think to know that you’re running your household well. Then, after a time of trial, perhaps days of serenity will return for me too. But in the meantime I’ll send you some canvases soon. 
   Russell also wrote to me, and I think it’s good to have written to him4 so that he doesn’t forget us completely – for your part speak of him from time to time so that people may know that although he works in isolation5 he’s a very good man, and I think he’ll do good things as one used to see in England, for example. He’s right a thousand times over to barricade himself in a little. Give my regards to the Pissarros, later I’m going to read your7 letters more calmly, and hope to write again tomorrow or the day after. My dear Theo, I haven’t been able to write to you until now, but as I’m feeling a little better these days I didn’t want to delay wishing a happy year to you, your wife and your child, since it’s your birthday. At the same time, please accept the various paintings I’m sending you2 with my thanks for all the kindnesses you’ve shown me, for without you I would be most unhappy. You’ll see that first there are canvases after Millet. As these aren’t destined for public viewing, perhaps you’ll make a present of them to our sisters sooner or later. But first you must keep the ones you consider good, and as many as you wish, they’re absolutely yours. One of these days you must send me some other things by ancient and modern artists to do, if you find any. The rest of the canvases are meagre, I’m very much behind, not having been able to work for two months. You’ll find that the olive trees with the pink sky are the best, with the mountains, I would imagine; the first go well as a pendant to those with the yellow sky. As regards the portrait of the Arlésienne, you know that I’ve promised our friend Gauguin one, and you must see that he gets it. Then the cypresses are for Mr Aurier. I would have liked to redo them with a little less impasto, but I don’t have the time. Anyway, they must be washed again several times in cold water, then a strong varnish when the impasto is dry right through, then the blacks won’t get dirty when the oil has fully evaporated. Now I would necessarily need colours, part of which you could well get from Tanguy’s if he’s hard up, or if that would please him. But of course he mustn’t be dearer than the other. Here’s the list of colours I would need 



Large 
    tubes.

12 zinc white, 3 cobalt, 5 Veronese green


1 ordinary lake


2 emerald green, 4 chrome 1, 2 chrome 2


1 orange lead, 2 ultramarine


 Here’s the list of colours I would need  Then (but from Tasset’s) 2 geranium lake, medium-sized tubes. You would do me a service by sending me at least half of it at once, at once, for I’ve lost too much time. Then I would need 6 brushes  around these sizes, and 7 metres of canvas, or even 10. What can I tell you of these two last months, things aren’t going well at all, I’m more sad and bored than I could tell you, and I no longer know what point I’m at. As the order for colours is a little large, let me wait for half if that suits you better. While I was ill I nevertheless still did a few small canvases from memory which you’ll see later, reminiscences of the north, and now I’ve just finished a sunlit corner of a meadow which I think is fairly vigorous. You’ll see it soon. As Mr Peyron is away I haven’t yet read your letters, but I know that some have come. He has been quite kind in informing you of the situation, as for me I don’t know what to do or think. But I have a great desire to leave this place. That won’t surprise you, I don’t need to tell you any more about it. 
   Letters have also come from home, which I haven’t yet had the courage to read, so melancholy do I feel. Please ask Mr Aurier not to write any more articles about my painting, tell him earnestly that first he is wrong about me, then that really I feel too damaged by grief to be able to face up to publicity. Making paintings distracts me – but if I hear talk of them that pains me more than he knows. How is Bernard? Since there are duplicates of some canvases, if you want you could do an exchange with him, because a good-quality canvas of his would look well in your collection. I fell ill at the time I was doing the almond-tree blossoms. If I’d been able to continue working, you can judge from that that I would have done others of the trees in blossom. Now the trees in blossom are almost finished, really I have no luck. Yes, I must try to leave here, but where am I to go? I don’t believe one can be more shut up and imprisoned in the places where they don’t pretend to leave you free, such as at Charenton or Montevergues. If you write home, give them my warm regards and tell them I think of them often. Then good handshake to you and Jo. Believe me Ever yours, Vincent. 
   Please send me what you can find of figures among my old drawings, I’m thinking of redoing the painting of the peasants eating supper, lamplight effect. That canvas must be completely dark now, perhaps I could redo it entirely from memory. You must above all send me the women gleaning and diggers, if there are any left. Then if you like I’ll redo the old tower at Nuenen19 and the cottage. I think that if you still have them I could now make something better of them from memory. My dear brother, Today, as Mr Peyron had come back, I read your kind letters, then the letters from home as well, and that did me an enormous amount of good in giving me back a little energy, or rather the desire to climb back up again from the dejected state I’m in. I thank you very much for the etchings1 – you’ve chosen some of the very ones that I’ve already liked for a long time, the David, the Lazarus, the Samaritan, and the large etching of the wounded man, and you’ve added the blind man6 and the other very small etching, the last one so mysterious that I’m afraid of it and dare not wish to know what it is. I didn’t know it, the little goldsmith. But the Lazarus! Early this morning I looked at it and I remembered not only what Charles Blanc says of it, but indeed even that he doesn’t say everything about it. The unfortunate thing is that the people here are too curious, idle and ignorant about painting for it to be possible for me to practise my profession. This is what one could always observe, that you and I made an effort here in the same direction as some others who weren’t understood either, and were bitterly saddened by circumstances.
   If ever you go to Montpellier you would see that what I tell you here is true. Now, rather, you propose coming back to the north, and I accept. I’ve had too hard a life to kick the bucket as a result, or to lose the power to work. So Gauguin and Guillaumin, the two of them, want to do an exchange for the landscape of the Alpilles. Besides, there are two of them, only I think that the one finished last, which I’ve just sent, is done with more determination and is more accurate in expression. I’m perhaps going to try to work from the Rembrandts, above all I have an idea to do the man at prayer13 in the range of tones running from bright yellow to violet. Included is Gauguin’s letter, do what you think best as regards the exchange, take the ones you like for yourself; I’m sure that our taste is increasingly becoming the same. Ah, if I’d been able to work without this bloody illness! How many things I could have done, isolated from the others, according to what the land would tell me. But yes – this journey is well and truly finished. Anyway, what consoles me is the great, the very great desire that I have to see you again, you, your wife and your child, 
         and so many friends who have remembered me in my misfortune, as, for that matter, I don’t stop thinking of them either. I’m almost sure that I’ll soon get better in the north, at least for quite a long time, while still apprehensive of a relapse in a few years’ time – but not immediately. That’s what I imagine after having observed the other patients here, some of whom are considerably older than I am or, among the young ones, were more or less idlers – students. Anyway, what do we know about it? Fortunately the letters from our sister and mother were very calm. Our sister writes very well, and describes a landscape or an aspect of the town as if it were a page from a modern novel. I always urge her to busy herself with domestic rather than artistic things, for I know that she’s already too sensitive, and at her age would have difficulty in finding the way to artistic development. I’m really afraid that she too will suffer from a thwarted artistic will. But she’s so energetic that she’ll make up for it. I talked with Mr Peyron about the situation, and told him that it was almost impossible for me to bear my fate here, that not 
   knowing anything very clear regarding the line to take, it seemed preferable to me to return to the north. If you think this is a good idea, and if you suggest a date when you expect me over there in Paris, I would have someone from here accompany me part of the way, as far as Tarascon or Lyon. Then you would wait for me, or have someone wait for me, at the station in Paris. Do what seems best to you. For the time being I would leave my furniture behind in Arles. It’s with friends, and I’m sure they’d send it the day I wanted it. But the carriage and packing would be almost what it’s worth. I consider this as a shipwreck, this journey, well, one can’t do as one wants, and as one ought to either. Once I got out a little into the park I recovered all my clarity for work, I have more ideas in my head than I could ever put into action, but without it dazzling me. The brushstrokes go like a machine. So based on that I dare believe that in the north I would rediscover my confidence once freed from surroundings and circumstances which I neither understand nor wish to understand. It was very kind of Mr Peyron to write to you, he’s writing to you again today, I leave him regretting that I have to leave him. Good handshake to you and to Jo, I thank her very much for her letter. Ever yours, Vincent  My dear Theo, Once again I’m writing to you to say that I’m staying well, yet I feel a little worn out by this long crisis, and I dare believe that the planned move will refresh my ideas more. I think that it’ll be best for me to go myself to see this doctor in the country as soon as possible; then we can soon decide if I’m going to lodge with him or temporarily at the inn; and thus we’ll avoid an over-long stay in Paris, a thing that I would fear. 
   You remember that 6 months ago I told you after a crisis that if it happened again I would ask you to let me move? We’re at that point – although I don’t feel capable of passing judgement on the way they have of dealing with the patients here – it’s enough that I feel that what remains to me of reason and capacity for work is absolutely in danger. While, on the contrary, I’m confident that I can prove to this doctor you speak of that I still know how to work logically, and he’ll treat me accordingly, and since he likes painting there’s sufficient chance that a solid friendship will result from it. I don’t think Mr Peyron will oppose a very prompt departure. Besides, I tell myself that the pleasure of spending a few days with you will do me a lot of good. And from that moment on we can really count on a period of relative health. So don’t delay in taking the necessary steps so that this doesn’t drag on. 
   Once I’m there I can send for my bed, which is in Arles. Besides, I would move anyway, preferring to be in an asylum where the patients worked to this awful idleness here, which really seems to me quite simply a crime. Anyway, you’ll tell me that this is seen more or less everywhere, and that there’s even plenty of it in Paris. Whatever the case, I hope that we’ll see each other again very soon. The etchings you sent me3 are really beautiful. Opposite this I’ve scribbled a croquis after a painting I’ve done of three figures which are in the background of the Lazarus etching. The dead man and his two sisters. The cave and the corpse are violet, yellow, white. The woman who is taking the handkerchief from the resurrected man’s face has a green dress and orange hair, the other has black hair and a striped garment. Green and pink. Behind a countryside, blue hills, a yellow rising sun. The combination of colours would thus itself speak of the same thing expressed by the chiaroscuro of the etching. 
   If I were still to have at my disposal the model who posed for the Berceuse5 and the other whose portrait you’ve just received after Gauguin’s drawing, then certainly I’d try to execute it in a large size, this canvas, the personalities being what I would have dreamed of as characters. But leaving aside subjects of this kind, there will still remain the study from life of peasants and landscapes when I’m back in the north. As regards the order for colours. Should I remain here for another few days, please send off part of it at once. If, however, I leave in the next few days – which I hope – you can keep it in Paris. In any event, write to me in the next few days; I hope that you’ll have received the canvases in good order. I’ve done another one of a nook of greenery which seems to me to have some freshness. I’ve also attempted a copy of Delacroix’s Good Samaritan. I think from a note in Le Figaro that père Quost must have a darned good painting in the Salon. Warm regards to your wife, I’m very much looking forward to making her acquaintance at last, and good handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My dear brother, Thanks for your kind letter and for the portrait of Jo, which is very pretty and is very successful as a pose. Well, I’ll be very simple and as practical as possible in my reply. First, I categorically reject what you say that I should be accompanied throughout the journey. Once on the train I no longer run any risk, I’m not one of those who are dangerous – even supposing I have a crisis, aren’t there other passengers in the carriage, and besides, don’t they know what to do in all the stations in such a case? You’re giving yourself worries here that weigh on me so heavily that it might directly discourage me. I’ve just said the same thing to Mr Peyron, and I pointed out to him that crises like the one I’ve just had have always been followed by three or four months of complete calm. I wish to take advantage of this period to move – I want to move in any event, my desire to leave here is now absolute. I don’t feel competent to judge the way they treat patients here, I don’t feel any desire to enter into the details – but please remember that I warned you around 6 months ago that if I was seized by a crisis of the same nature I’d wish to change asylums. And I’ve delayed too long already, having allowed an attack to go by in the meantime, I was then right in the middle of work, and I wanted to finish canvases in progress, otherwise I would no longer be here by now. Right, so I’m going to tell you that it seems to me that a fortnight at the most (a week, though, would please me more) should be enough to take the necessary steps to move. I shall have someone accompany me as far as Tarascon – even one or two stations further if you insist. Once I’ve arrived in Paris (I’ll send a telegram when I leave here) you would come and pick me up at the Gare de Lyon.
   Now it would seem preferable to me to go and see this doctor in the country as soon as possible, and we’d leave the luggage at the station. So I would only stay at your place for let’s say 2 or 3 days, then I’d leave for this village. Where I would start off by lodging at the inn. This, it seems to me, is what you could do in the next few days– without delay – write to our future friend, that doctor: ‘my brother would very much like to make your acquaintance, and as he would prefer to consult you before prolonging his stay in Paris, hopes that you will approve of his spending a few weeks in your village, where he will come to make some studies; he has complete confidence that he will reach an understanding with you, believing that with a return to the north his illness will abate, whereas by staying on in the south his condition would be in danger of becoming more acute.’ There, you could write to him like that, we’d send him a telegram the day after my arrival in Paris, or the day after that, and he’d probably wait for me at the station. The surroundings here are starting to weigh on me more than I could express – my word, I’ve waited patiently for over a year – I need air, I feel damaged by boredom and grief. Then work is pressing, I’d be wasting my time here. Why then, I ask you, do you fear accidents so much – it isn’t that that ought to frighten you, my word, since I’ve been here I’ve seen people fall over or lose their mind every day – what’s more serious is to try and take misfortune into account. I assure you that it’s already something to resign oneself to living under guard, 
   even in the event of it being sympathetic, and to sacrifice one’s freedom, to stand outside society and to have only one’s work, without distraction. That has carved out wrinkles that won’t be rubbed off in a hurry. Now that it’s beginning to weigh too heavily upon me here, I think that it’s only right to put a stop to it. So please write to Mr Peyron that he should let me leave, let’s say on the 15th at the latest. If I waited I would let the good moment of calm between two crises pass, and leaving now I’ll have the free time necessary to make the other doctor’s acquaintance. Then, if in a while from now the illness were to recur it would be foreseen, and according to how serious it was we could see if I can continue at liberty or if I must stick myself in an asylum for good. In the latter case – as I told you in my last letter I would go into an institution where the patients work in the fields and in the workshop. I think that even more than here I’d then find subjects for painting. Consider, then, that the journey costs a lot, that it’s pointless and that I do have the right to change asylums if I please, it isn’t my absolute freedom that I’m demanding. I’ve tried to be patient up to this point, I haven’t done any harm to anyone, is it fair to have me accompanied like a dangerous animal? No thank you, I protest. If a crisis occurs, they know what to do in every station, and then I’d let them do it. 
   But I dare believe that my composure won’t desert me. I have so much distress at leaving like this, that the distress will be stronger than the madness, I’ll therefore have the necessary nerve, I dare believe. Mr Peyron says vague things, to free himself from responsibility he says, but that way we’d never, never get to the end of it, the thing would drag on and on, and in the end we’d get angry with each other. As for me, my patience is at an end, at an end, my dear brother, I can’t go on, I must move, even if as a stopgap. However, there really is a chance that the change will do me good – work is going well, I’ve done 2 canvases of the fresh grass in the park, one of which is extremely simple. Here’s a hasty croquis of it.  The trunk of a pine tree violet pink, and then grass with white flowers and dandelions, a little rose bush and other tree-trunks in the background, in the uppermost part of the canvas. I’ll be out of doors there. I’m sure that the desire to work will devour me and make me insensible to everything else and in a good mood. And I’ll let myself go there, not without consideration but without dwelling on regrets for things that might have been. They say that in painting one must seek nothing and hope for nothing but a good painting and a good talk and a good dinner as the height of happiness, not counting the less brilliant interludes. Perhaps it’s true, and why refuse to take what is possible, especially if by doing so one gives the illness the slip. Good handshake to you and to Jo, I think I’m going to do a painting for myself after the subject of the portrait, it may not be a resemblance perhaps, but anyway I’ll try. More soon, I hope – and come on, spare me this forced travelling companion. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear brother, Thanks very much for your registered letter containing 150 francs, which arrived this morning. I also received canvases and colours from Tasset & Lhote (were those from Tanguy in the same consignment?), and I can’t thank you too much for them, for if I didn’t have my work I’d have sunk far deeper long since. At the moment the improvement is continuing, the whole horrible crisis has disappeared like a thunderstorm, and I’m working here with calm, unremitting ardour to give a last stroke of the brush. I’m working on a canvas of roses on bright green background2 and two canvases of large bouquets of violet Irises, one lot against a pink background in which the effect is harmonious and soft through the combination of greens, pinks, violets. On the contrary, the other violet bouquet (ranging up to pure carmine and Prussian blue) standing out against a striking lemon yellow background with other yellow tones in the vase and the base on which it rests is an effect of terribly disparate complementaries that reinforce each other by their opposition.
   These canvases will take a good month to dry, but the man who works here5 will take care of sending them after my departure. I’m planning to leave as soon as possible this week, and I’m starting to pack my trunk today. I’ll send you a telegram from Tarascon. Yes, it seems to me, too, that there’s been a very long period between the day when we said our goodbyes at the railway station and these present days. But – strange thing again that, just as that day we were so struck by Seurat’s canvases, these last days here are once again like a revelation of colour to me. My dear brother, I feel I have more confidence in my work than when I left, and it would be ungrateful of me to speak ill of the south, and I confess that it’s with great sorrow that I turn my back on it. If your work prevented you from coming to get me at the station, or if it was at a difficult time or if the weather was too bad, don’t worry, I’d certainly find my way, and I feel so calm that it would greatly astonish me if I lost my composure. 
   How much I want to see you again, and meet Jo and the baby. It’s likely that I’ll arrive in Paris around 5 o’clock in the morning. But anyway, the telegram will tell you precisely. The day I leave depends on my having packed my trunk and finished my canvases, I’m working on the latter with so much enthusiasm that packing my trunk seems more difficult to me than doing the paintings. Anyway it won’t be long. I’m very glad that it hasn’t dragged on, which is always lamentable when one makes a resolution. I’m very much looking forward to seeing the Japanese prints, and also I don’t at all disdain seeing the Salon, in which it seems to me that there’ll be interesting things all the same, although having read Le Figaro’s account, indeed it leaves me more or less cold. Warm regards to Jo, and good handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear brother After a last discussion with Mr Peyron I obtained permission to pack my trunk, which I’ve sent by goods train. The 30 kilos of luggage one is allowed to take will allow me to take a few frames, easel and some stretching frames &c. I’ll leave as soon as you’ve written to Mr Peyron, I feel calm enough, and I don’t think that a mental upset could easily happen to me in the state I’m in. In any event, I hope to be in Paris before Sunday to spend the day, which you will have off, quietly with all of you. I really hope to see André Bonger too at the first opportunity. I’ve also just finished a canvas of pink roses against yellow-green background in a green vase.
   I hope that the canvases of the last few days will compensate us for the expenses of travel. This morning, as I’d been to have my trunk stamped, I saw the countryside again – very fresh after the rain and covered in flowers – how many more things I would have done. I’ve also written to Arles for them to send the two beds and the bed linen by goods train. I estimate that this can only cost a good ten francs in transport charges, and it’s still something gained from the debacle. For it’ll certainly be useful to me in the country. If you haven’t yet replied to Mr Peyron’s letter, please send him a telegram, in such a way that I may make the journey on Friday or Saturday at the latest to spend Sunday with 
   you. In doing so I’ll also lose the least time for my work, which is finished here for the moment. In Paris, if I feel up to it, I’d immediately very much like to do a painting of a yellow bookshop (gas effect), which I’ve had in my mind for so long. You’ll see that I’ll be at work right from the day after my arrival. I tell you, as regards work, my mind feels absolutely serene and the brushstrokes come to me and follow each other very logically. Anyway until Sunday AT THE LATEST, I shake your hand firmly in the meantime, warm regards to Jo. Ever yours, Vincent. Probably the answer to Mr Peyron will already have left, which I hope. I was a little vexed that there were a few days’ delay, because that seems to me to be of no use for anything. For either 
         I’d plunge into new works here, or it’s now that I have the leisure for the journey. Spending days doing nothing, here or elsewhere, that’s what would make me miserable in my current state of mind. Besides, Mr P. isn’t opposed to it, but naturally when you leave, your position is a little difficult with the rest of the administration. But it’s going well, and we’ll part amicably. My dear Theo and dear Jo After making Jo’s acquaintance it will be difficult for me from now on to write to Theo alone, but Jo will permit me, I hope, to write in French, because after two years in the south I really think, in doing so, that I tell you better what I have to say. Auvers is really beautiful – among other things many old thatched roofs, which are becoming rare. I’d hope, then, that in doing a few canvases of that really seriously, there would be a chance of recouping some of the costs of my stay – for really it’s gravely beautiful, it’s the heart of the countryside, distinctive and picturesque. I’ve seen Dr Gachet, who gave me the impression of being rather eccentric, but his doctor’s experience must keep him balanced himself while combating the nervous ailment from which it seems to me he’s certainly suffering at least as seriously as I am.
   He directed me to an inn where they were asking 6 francs a day. For my part I’ve found one where I’ll pay 3. a day. And until there’s a change of circumstances I think I ought to stay there. When I’ve done a few studies I’ll see if there would be any advantage in moving. But it seems unjust to me, when one wants to and can pay and work like any other workman, to have to pay almost double all the same because one works at painting. Anyway I’m starting with the 3. inn. You’ll probably see Dr Gachet this week – he has a very fine Pissarro, winter with red house in the snow, and two fine bouquets by Cézanne.
   Also another Cézanne of the village. Myself, in my turn I’ll gladly, very gladly give a stroke of the brush here. I told Dr Gachet that I would find the inn he suggested preferable at 4 francs a day, but that 6 was 2 francs too dear for the expenses I’m having. It’s all right for him to say that I’ll be quieter there, enough is enough. His own house is full of old things, dark, dark, dark, with the exception of a few sketches by Impressionists I mentioned. Despite the fact that he’s an odd fellow, the impression he made on me isn’t unfavourable. Chatting of Belgium6 and the days of the old painters, his grief-stiffened face took on a smile again, and I really think 
   that I’ll stay friends with him and that I’ll do his portrait. Then he tells me that I must work a great deal, boldly, and not think at all about what I’ve had. I really felt in Paris that all the noise there wasn’t what I need. How pleased I am to have seen Jo and the little one and your apartment, which is indeed better than the other one. Wishing you good luck and health, and hoping to see you again very soon, good handshakes Vincent. My dear Theo and Jo, In the other letter I first of all forgot to give you the address here, which for the time being is: place de la Mairie, c/o Ravoux. Then when I wrote to you I hadn’t yet done anything. Now I have a study of old thatched roofs with a field of peas in flower and some wheat in the foreground, hilly background. A study which I think you’ll like. And I perceive already that it did me good to go into the south the better to see the north. It’s as I supposed, I see violets more where they are. Auvers is decidedly very beautiful. So much so that I think it’ll be more advantageous to work than not to work, despite all the bad luck that’s to be foreseen with paintings. It’s very colourful here – but what pretty middle-class country houses there are; much prettier than Ville-d’Avray2 &c., to my taste. 
   Appears that Dumoulin, the one who does Japan, was here but has left again. If, towards the end of the week, you could send me some money, what I have will keep me going until then but I don’t have enough for any longer. I’d also ask you for 10 metres of canvas if that wouldn’t inconvenience you, but if it would inconvenience you, since it’s near the end of the month, you could send 20 sheets of Ingres paper. I would need these anyway so as not to waste any time. There’s a lot to draw here. My dear fellow, upon reflection I don’t say that my work is good, but it’s the least bad that I can do. All the rest, 
   relations with people, is very secondary, because I have no talent for that. I can’t do anything about that. Not working or working less would cost double, that’s all I can foresee IF we sought another way of arriving than the natural way, working – which we shan’t do. Look, if I work, the people who are here will come just as well to my place without my deliberately going to see them as if I took steps to make acquaintances. It’s by working that people meet each other, and that’s the best way. Am moreover quite convinced that that’s your opinion and also Jo’s. I can do nothing about my illness – I’m suffering a little these days – it’s just that after this long seclusion the days seem like weeks to me. 
   I had that in Paris, and here too. But as work is proceeding a little, serenity will come. Whatever the case, I don’t regret coming back here, and things will go better here. Will be very pleased if in a little while from now you could come here one Sunday with your family. You’ll clearly see that to understand the countryside and the culture it only does one good to see other lands. But I find the modern villas and the middle-class country houses almost as pretty as the old thatched cottages that are falling into ruin. From what people say, Mrs Daubigny and Mrs Daumier are still living here, at least I’m sure that the former still lives here. When you can do so, you might send me Bargue’s Exercices au fusain for a while, I absolutely need it, I’ll copy them to keep the copies for good. Most cordial handshakes. Vincent My dear Theo, my dear Jo, Thank you for your letter which I received this morning, and for the fifty francs that were inside it. Today I saw Dr Gachet again, and I’m going to paint at his place on Tuesday morning, then I’m going to lunch with him and afterwards he’ll come to see my painting. He seems very reasonable to me, but is as discouraged in his profession of country doctor as I with my painting. So I told him that I would, however, gladly swap profession for profession. Anyway, I readily think that I’ll end up being friends with him. He told me, besides, that if melancholy or something else were to become too strong for me to bear, he could well do something again to lessen its intensity, and that I mustn’t be embarrassed to be open with him. Well, that moment when I have need of him may indeed come, however up to today things are going well. And they may get even better, I still believe that it’s above all an illness of the south that I caught, and that the return here will be enough to dispel all that. Often, very often, I think of your little one, and I then tell myself that I would like him to be big enough to come to the country. For it’s the best system of bringing them up here. How I would like you, Jo and the little one to have a rest in the country instead of the traditional journey to Holland. Yes, I’m well aware that Mother will absolutely want to see the little one, and it’s certainly a reason to go there. However, she would certainly understand if it were really in the little one’s best interests. Here we’re far enough from Paris for it to be the real countryside, but nevertheless, how changed since Daubigny. But not changed in an unpleasant way, there are many villas and various modern and middle-class dwellings, very jolly, sunny and covered with flowers. 
   That in an almost lush countryside, just at this moment of the development of a new society in the old one, has nothing disagreeable about it; there’s a lot of well-being in the air. I see or think I see a calm there à la Puvis de Chavannes, no factories, but beautiful greenery in abundance and in good order. When you have the opportunity, will you tell me which painting Miss Boch bought? I must write to her brother to thank them, and then I would propose the exchange of two of my studies for one by each of them. Enclosed is a note which you will please send to Isaäcson. I have a drawing of an old vineyard of which I plan to do a no. 30 canvas, then a study of pink chestnut trees5 and one of white chestnut trees. But if circumstances permit, I hope to do a little figure work. Paintings vaguely present themselves to my sight which it will take time to shape, but that will come little by little. If I hadn’t been ill, I would have written to Boch and to Isaäcson long since. My trunk hasn’t arrived yet, which annoys me, I sent a telegram this morning. Thank you in advance for the canvas and the paper. Yesterday and today it rains and is stormy, but it isn’t unpleasant to see these effects again. The beds haven’t arrived either. But despite these annoyances, I feel happy no longer to be so far from you all and our friends. I hope that your health will be good. It seemed to me, though, that you had less appetite than before, and from what the doctors say, we should have very solid food for our temperaments. So be sensible about it, especially Jo too, as she has her child to feed. Truly, the amount should be doubled, it wouldn’t be any exaggeration when there are children to make and feed. Without that it’s like a train moving slowly where the route is straight. Time enough to reduce steam when the route is more uneven. Handshake in thought. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, For several days now I’d have liked to write to you with a rested mind, but have been absorbed in work. This morning your letter arrives, for which I thank you and for the 50-franc note it contained. Yes, I think that it would be good for many reasons that we were all together again here for a week of your holidays, if longer isn’t possible. I often think of you, Jo and the little one, and I see that the children here look well in the healthy fresh air. And yet it’s difficult enough to raise them, even here, all the more is it rather terrible sometimes to keep them safe and sound in Paris on a fourth floor. But anyway, one must take things as they are. Mr Gachet says that father and mother must feed themselves quite naturally, he talks of taking 2 litres of beer a day &c., in those amounts. But you’ll certainly enjoy furthering your acquaintance with him, and he’s already counting on it, speaks of it every time I see him, that you’ll all come. He certainly appears to me as ill and confused as you or I, and he’s older and a few years ago he lost his wife, but he’s very much a doctor, and his profession and his faith keep him going however. We’re already firm friends, and by chance he also knew Bruyas of Montpellier2 and has the same ideas on him as I have, that he’s someone important in the history of modern art. I’m working on his portrait  the head with a white cap, very fair, very light, the hands also in light carnation, a blue frock coat and a cobalt blue background, leaning on a red table on which are a yellow book and a foxglove plant with purple flowers. It’s in the same sentiment as the portrait of myself that I took when I left for here. Mr Gachet is absolutely fanatical about this portrait, and wants me to do one of him if I can, absolutely like that, which I also wish to do. He has now also come to understand the last portrait of the Arlésienne, one of which you have in pink5 – he comes back all the time, when he comes to see the studies, to these two portraits and he accepts them fully, but fully as they are. 
   I hope to send you a portrait of him soon. Then I painted two studies at his house which I gave him last week. One aloes with marigolds and cypresses, then last Sunday white roses, vines and a white figure in it. I’ll very probably also do the portrait of his daughter, who is 19, and with whom I can easily imagine Jo will quickly make friends. So I’m looking forward to doing the portraits of all of you in the open air, yours, Jo’s and the little one’s. I still haven’t found anything interesting in the way of a possible studio, and yet I’ll have to take a room to put in the canvases which are surplus at your apartment and which are at Tanguy’s. For they still need a great deal of retouching. But anyway, I live from day to day – the weather is so fine. And my health is good, I go to bed at 9 o’clock but I get up at 5 o’clock most of the time. I have hopes that it won’t be disagreeable to be together again after a long absence. And I also hope that I’ll continue to feel much surer of my brush than before I went to Arles. And Mr Gachet says that he would consider it highly improbable that it should recur, and that it’s going completely well. But he, too, complains bitterly of the state of things everywhere in the villages where the least foreigner has come, that life there becomes so horribly expensive. He says that he’s astonished that the people where I am lodge and feed me for that, and that I’m still fortunate, compared to others who have come and whom he’s known. That if you come, and Jo and the little one, you can’t do better than stay at this same inn. Now nothing, absolutely nothing keeps us here but Gachet – but the latter will remain a friend, I’d assume. I feel that at his place I can do not too bad a painting every time I go there, and he’ll certainly continue to invite me to dinner each Sunday or Monday. But up to now, however agreeable it is to do a painting there, it’s a chore for me to dine and lunch there for, the excellent man goes to the trouble of making dinners in which there are 4 or 5 courses, which is as abominable 
   for him as it is for me, for he certainly doesn’t have a strong stomach. What has held me back a little from saying something about it is that I see that, for him, it reminds him of the days of yore when people had family dinners, which anyway we too well know. But the modern idea of eating one, at most two courses is, however, certainly progress, and a healthy return to true antiquity. Anyway père Gachet is a lot, yes a lot like you and I. I was pleased to read in your letter that Mr Peyron asked for news of me when he wrote to you. I’m going to write to him this very evening that things are going well, for he was very kind to me and I’ll certainly not forget him. Dumoulin, the one who has Japanese paintings at the Champ de Mars, has come back here, and I very much hope to meet him. What did Gauguin say about the last portrait of the Arlésienne that’s done after his drawing? You’ll end up seeing, I would think, that it’s one of the least bad things I’ve done. Gachet has a Guillaumin, naked woman on a bed, which I consider very beautiful, he also has a very old Guillaumin portrait by him, very different from ours, dark but interesting. But his house, you will see, is full, full like an antique dealer’s, of things that aren’t always interesting, it’s terrible, even. But in all of this there’s this good aspect, that there would always be what I need there for arranging flowers or still lifes. I’ve done studies for him, to show him that should he not be paid in money we’ll nevertheless still compensate him for what he does for us. Do you know an etching by Bracquemond, the portrait of Comte, it’s a masterpiece. I’d also need as soon as possible 12 tubes zinc white from Tasset and 2 medium tubes geranium lake. 
   Then as soon as you could send them I’d be absolutely set upon copying all of Bargue’s Etudes au fusain again, you know the nude figures. I can draw them quite quickly, let’s say the 60 sheets that there are in a month, so you might send a copy on loan, I’d make sure not to stain or dirty it. If I neglected to keep on studying proportions and the nude I’d find myself in a bad position later on. Don’t think this absurd or futile. Gachet also told me that if I wanted to give him great pleasure he would like me to redo for him the copy of Delacroix’s Pietà, which he gazed at for a long time. Later he’ll probably give me a hand with the models, I feel that he’ll understand us completely, and that he’ll work with you and me without reservation, with all his intelligence, for the love of art for art’s sake. And he’ll perhaps have me do some portraits. Now to have clients for portraits one must be able to show different ones that one has done. That’s the only possibility I can see of placing something. But however, however, certain canvases will one day find collectors. Only I think that all the fuss created by the large prices paid lately for Millets &c. has further worsened the state of things as regards the chance one has of merely recouping one’s painting expenses. It’s enough to make one dizzy. So why are we thinking about it, it would stupefy us. Better still, perhaps, to seek a little friendship and live from day to day. I hope that the little one will continue to be well, and you two also until we see each other again, more soon, I shake your hand firmly. Vincent Dear brother and sister, Sunday has left me a very pleasant memory. In this way we really feel that we’re not so far from one another, and I hope that we’ll see each other again often. Since Sunday I’ve done two studies of houses in the greenery;2 a whole colony of Americans has installed itself beside the house where I am. They paint, but I haven’t yet seen what they do. On reflection, as regards taking that house or another one, here’s what there is. Here I pay one franc a day for my bed, so if I had the furniture the difference between 365 francs and 400 wouldn’t, in my opinion, be of very great importance, and then I’d very much like you to have a pied-à-terre in the country at the same time as myself. But I’m beginning to believe that I must consider the furniture lost. 
       As far as I can imagine, my friends where it is won’t put themselves out to send it to me, as I’m no longer there. It’s above all the traditional laziness and the old traditional story that on their side strangers who pass through leave the temporary furniture in the place where it is. But I’ve just written to them again for the third time that I have urgent need of it, I said in my letter that if I didn’t have news of them I would feel obliged to send them a louis7 for the costs of sending it. That will probably have some effect, but it’s impolite. What can you do, in the south it isn’t entirely as it is in the north. The people there do what they want and don’t give themselves the trouble of thinking or paying attention to others if one isn’t there. The moment you’re in Paris it’s like being in the otherworld. And 
   I think that they probably won’t put themselves out, all the more so because they won’t like to get more mixed up in this business which people have talked so much about in Arles. It’s odd, all the same, that the nightmare should have ceased to such an extent here. I always told Mr Peyron that the return to the north would rid me of it, but odd, too, that it had got rather worse under the latter’s supervision, although he’s very capable and definitely wished me well. On my side, too, it causes me distress to stir all this up by writing to people. I thought that the little one looks well, and you two also; you must come back quickly. As regards a carrier, there’s none from here directly to Paris, but there is one from Pontoise. Now there’s one every day from Pontoise to here. So please would you ask père Tanguy to set to work with all speed to take all the nails out of the canvases that are on stretching frames up there in the attic. He can make rolls of the canvases, parcels of the stretching frames.
   Then either I’ll send the carrier from Pontoise or else I’ll come in a fortnight one time with Mr Gachet and take some. At your place, too, in the pile under the bed, I’ve seen many that I can retouch, I believe, to their advantage. I really regret not seeing the Raffaëlli exhibition. I would especially also like to see your arrangement of those drawings on cretonne, as you were saying. One day or another I believe I’ll find a way to do an exhibition of myself in a café. I wouldn’t detest exhibiting with Chéret, who must certainly have ideas on that. More soon. I shake your hand firmly, wishing you good fortune, especially with the little one. Yours truly, Vincent. My dear Theo, At last I’ve received news about my furniture, the man who has it has been ill all the time, having been struck by the horn of one of the bulls while helping to unload them. So his wife writes to me that it was because of this that they’d put it off from one day to the next, but that on Saturday, today in other words, they’d send it; they have no luck, the wife having been ill too, and not yet being completely recovered. By the way, there wasn’t one word of reproach in the letter, except that it had upset them that I hadn’t come to see them before leaving, that upset me too. Enclosed I must send you an order for some colours. I have another study that’s in the genre of the Harvest that’s at your place in the room where the piano is. Fields viewed from a height with a road on which there’s a small carriage. Currently I’m working on a field of poppies in some lucerne. And I have a vineyard study, which Mr Gachet liked very much the last time he came to see. For the moment I have nothing else to say, a letter came from Mother who had been at Nuenen and was very much longing to see you come and to see the little one again. A firm handshake for both of you. Ever yours, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks much for your letter of the day before yesterday, and for the 50-franc note it contained. I waited for the consignment of colours and canvas from Tasset, which has just arrived, and for which I also thank you very much, to answer the question regarding the difference between Tanguy and Tasset colours. Well, it’s absolutely the same thing, in the Tasset tubes there are some from time to time, especially for the white, that aren’t filled properly. However, when Tanguy for his part also fills them badly too, — certainly without doing so deliberately – the tubes of cobalt, for example like the one I have in my hands – so I’m talking only based on the same fact that exists on both sides – I just don’t see why one would have any very serious things to reproach the other with. Is there a difference in the invoices? That’s what would interest me more. And then in the colours there is adulteration as in wines. How can one judge correctly when, like myself, one knows nothing of chemistry. I’d nevertheless consider it very good that, should père Tanguy be going to extraordinary lengths for us by putting his time and his effort into packing up and dispatching the canvases that are in his attic, then you should get paint from him, even if it’s a little worse than the other. It would only be fair.
   But what he says about a difference in the tubes, I repeat, it’s pure imagination on his part. And the reason why we went to Tasset’s is that the latter’s colours are in general less insipid. Now this difference isn’t important, and if Tanguy has the good will to pack up the canvases stored at his place – fair that he has the order for the colours. It was with pleasure that I made the acquaintance of the Dutchman, who came yesterday. He looks much too nice to be doing painting in the current conditions. If he nevertheless persists in wanting to do it I told him that he would do well to go to Brittany with Gauguin and De Haan, because he’ll live there on 3 francs a day instead of 5 francs, and will have good company. That I myself also hope very much to join them, since Gauguin is going there. I was really pleased to learn that they’re going to renew their attempt there. Certainly you’re right that it’s better for Gauguin than staying in Paris. Very pleased, too, that he likes the head of that Arlésienne. I really hope to do a few etchings of subjects from the south, let’s say 6, since 
   I can print them free of charge at Mr Gachet’s; he’s very willing to run them off for nothing if I do them. It’s certainly a thing that must be done, and we’ll act in such a way that in some way it forms a sequel to the Lauzet-Monticelli publication, if you approve. And Gauguin will probably engrave a few of his canvases in combination with me. His painting which belongs to you, and especially for the rest of the Martinique things. Which plates Mr Gachet will also print off for us. Of course we’ll leave him free to run off copies for himself. Mr Gachet will come one day to see my canvases in Paris, and then we’d choose the ones to be engraved. At the moment I have two studies on the go – one a bouquet of wild plants, thistles, ears of wheat, leaves of different types of greenery. One almost red, the other very green, the other yellowing. The second study a white house amid greenery with a star in the night sky and an orange light at the window and dark greenery and a sombre pink note. That’s all for the moment. I have an idea for doing a more important canvas of Daubigny’s house and garden, of which I already have a small study.
   I was really pleased that Gauguin is going off with De Haan again. Naturally this Madagascar plan seems to me hardly possible to carry out, I would much prefer to see him leave for Tonkin. If, however, he went to Madagascar I’d be able to follow him there. For one should go there in twos or threes. But we aren’t there yet. Certainly the future is very much in the tropics for painting, either in Java or in Martinique, Brazil or Australia, and not here, but you feel that it hasn’t been proved to me that you, Gauguin or I are those people of that future. But certainly once again, there and not here, one day, probably soon, one will see Impressionists working who will hold their own with Millet, Pissarro. Believing in that is natural, but going there without the means of existence or a relationship with Paris, a mad impulse when for years on end one has rusted away while vegetating here. Well. Thanks again, and good handshake to you and your wife, and good health to the little one, whom I’m really longing to see again. Yours truly, Vincent. My dear Theo, Thanks very much for your letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. The exchange you made with Boch is very good, and am very curious to see what sort of thing he’s making at present. I hope that Jo’s health is better, since you say that she’s been indisposed. Indeed, you must come here as soon as possible, nature is very, very beautiful here, and I’m longing to see you all again. Mr Peyron wrote to me two days ago. His letter is enclosed. I told him that it seemed to me sufficient to give the lads ten francs or so. Now the canvases from down there have arrived, the Irises have dried well and I dare believe that you’ll find something in them;3 thus there are also some roses, a wheatfield, a little canvas with mountains6 and finally a cypress with a star. This week I’ve done a portrait of a young girl of 16 or so, in blue against a blue background, the daughter of the people where I’m lodging. I gave her that portrait but I’ve done a variant for you, a no. 15 canvas.  Then I have a canvas one metre long by only 50 centimetres high, of fields of wheat, and one that makes a pendant of undergrowth, 
   lilac trunks of poplars, and underneath them some flower-dotted grass, pink, yellow, white and various greens. Finally a night effect – two completely dark pear trees against yellowing sky with wheatfields, and in the violet background the castle encased in the dark greenery. The Dutchman12 is working quite assiduously, but still deludes himself considerably about the originality of his way of seeing. He does studies a little like Koning did, a little grey, a little green with a red roof, a whitening road. What can you say in a case like that, if he has money then certainly he does right to do painting. But if he has to scheme a lot to sell them I feel sorry for him doing it, painting, as I pity others for buying it at a price that’s relatively too high. If, though, he just works assiduously every day, he might get there. But alone or with painters who work little he wouldn’t do much, I think.
   I hope to do Miss Gachet’s portrait next week, and perhaps I’ll also have a country girl to pose too. I’m pleased that Boch is doing this exchange with me, for I thought that, relatively, they’d paid a little too much for the other canvas, being friends. I’d very much like to come to Paris for a few days a little later, precisely in order to go and see Quost once, to see Jeannin, one or two others. I’d very much like you to have a Quost, and there would probably be a way of exchanging one. Gachet will come today to see the canvases from the south. Good fortune with the little one, and good handshake in thought for you and Jo. My dear Theo, You could send the attached order for colours1 at the beginning of the month, anyway at the most convenient moment, there’s no urgency for a few days earlier or later. Yesterday and the day before yesterday I painted Miss Gachet’s portrait, which you’ll see soon, I hope. The dress is pink.  But we’re still a long way from people understanding the curious relationships that exist between one piece of nature and another, which however explain and bring each other out.
   But a few, though, do feel it, and that’s already something. And then this has been gained, that in women’s clothes one sees very pretty arrangements of bright colours. If only one could have the individuals one sees pass by to do their portraits, it would be as pretty as any past era, and I even think that often in nature there is currently all the grace of Puvis’s painting, Between art and nature. Thus yesterday I saw two figures, the mother in dark carmine dress, the daughter in pale pink with a yellow hat without any ornamentation, very healthy figures, rustic, well tanned by the open air, burned by the sun, the mother especially with a very, very red face and black hair and two diamonds in her ears. And I thought again of that canvas by Delacroix, Maternal upbringing. For in the expressions on the faces there really was everything that there was in the head of George Sand. Do you know that there’s a bust-length portrait of George Sand by Delacroix, there’s a wood engraving of it in L’Illustration – with the hair cut short. Good handshake in thought to you and Jo, and good fortune with the little one. Ever yours, Vincent My dear Theo and dear Jo. I’ve just received the letter in which you say that the child is ill;1 I’d very much like to come and see you, and what holds me back is the thought that I’d be even more powerless than you are in the given state of distress. But I can feel how very exhausting it must be, and would like to be able to lend a hand. By coming straightaway I fear I would increase the confusion. However, I share your anxieties with all my heart. It’s a real pity that at Mr Gachet’s the house is so cluttered with all sorts of things. Otherwise I think it would be a good plan to come and lodge here – at his house – with the little one, at least for a good month – I think that the country air has an enormous effect. In the street here there are kids born in Paris and really sickly – who however are well. Coming here to the inn would be possible too, it’s true. So that you aren’t too alone I could come myself to stay at your place for a week or fortnight. That wouldn’t increase the expenses. For the little one, truly I’m beginning to fear that he must be given air, and especially the little bustle of the other children of a village. Surely, Jo too, who shares our anxieties and risks, I think that from time to time she must take this distraction of the country. A rather melancholy letter from Gauguin, he talks vaguely of having definitely decided on Madagascar, but so vaguely that one can clearly see that he’s only thinking of it because he doesn’t really know what else to think about. And the execution of the plan seems almost absurd to me.
    
   Here are three croquis – one of a figure of a peasant woman, big yellow hat with a knot of sky-blue ribbons, very red face. Coarse blue blouse with orange spots, background of ears of wheat. It’s a no. 30 canvas but it’s really a little coarse, I fear. Then the horizontal landscape with the fields, a subject like one of Michel’s – but then the coloration is soft green, yellow and green-blue. Then undergrowth, violet trunks of poplars which cross the landscape perpendicularly like columns. The depths of the undergrowth are blue, and under the big trunks the flowery meadow, white, pink, yellow, green, long russet grasses and flowers. The people here at the inn used to live in Paris; there they were constantly indisposed, parents and children, here they never have anything, and especially not the littlest one which came here when it was 2 months old, and then the mother had difficulty in suckling him, while here all of that went well almost immediately. In another respect you work all day long, and at the moment you’re probably hardly sleeping. I’d willingly believe that Jo would have twice as much milk here, and that then when she came here one could do without cows, donkeys and other quadrupeds. And as for Jo, so that during the daytime she has company, my word, she could also go and stay just opposite père Gachet, perhaps you remember that there’s an inn just opposite at the bottom of the slope.
   What do you want me to say as regards the future, perhaps, perhaps, without the Boussods? What will be, will be, you haven’t spared yourself trouble for them, you’ve served them with an exemplary fidelity all the time. I, too, am trying to do as well as I can, but I don’t hide from you that I scarcely dare count on always having the necessary health. And if my illness recurred you would excuse me, I still love art and life very much, but as to ever having a wife of my own I don’t believe in it very strongly. I fear, rather, that towards let’s say the age of forty – but let’s not say anything – I declare that I know nothing, absolutely nothing, of what turn it may yet take. But I’m writing to you at once that as regards the little one I think you mustn’t worry yourselves excessively; if it’s that he’s teething, well to make the task easier for him perhaps we could distract him more here where there are children, animals, flowers and good air. I shake your hand and Jo’s firmly in thought, and kiss the little one. Ever yours, Vincent Thank you for the consignment of colours, for the 50-franc note and for the article on the Independents. An Englishman, Australian, called Walpole Brooke will probably come to see you; he lives at 16 rue de la Grande Chaumière – I told him that you would let him know a time when he could come and see my canvases that are at your place. He’ll probably show you some of his studies, which are still rather lifeless, but however he does observe nature. He has been here in Auvers for months, and we went out together sometimes, he was brought up in Japan, you would never think so from his painting – but that may come. Dear brother and sister, Jo’s letter was really like a gospel for me, a deliverance from anguish which I was caused by the rather difficult and laborious hours for us all that I shared with you. It’s no small thing when all together we feel the daily bread in danger, no small thing when for other causes than that we also feel our existence to be fragile. Once back here3 I too still felt very saddened, and had continued to feel the storm that threatens you also weighing upon me. What can be done – you see I usually try to be quite good-humoured, but my life, too, is attacked at the very root, my step also is faltering. I feared – not completely – but a little nonetheless – that I was a danger to you, living at your expense – but Jo’s letter clearly proves to me that 
   you really feel that for my part I am working and suffering like you. There – once back here I set to work again – the brush however almost falling from my hands and – knowing clearly what I wanted I’ve painted another three large canvases since then. They’re immense stretches of wheatfields under turbulent skies, and I made a point of trying to express sadness, extreme loneliness. You’ll see this soon, I hope – for I hope to bring them to you in Paris as soon as possible, since I’d almost believe that these canvases will tell you what I can’t say in words, what I consider healthy and fortifying about the countryside. Now the third canvas is Daubigny’s garden, 
   a painting I’d been thinking about ever since I’ve been here. I hope with all my heart that the planned journey may provide you with a little distraction. I often think of the little one, I believe that certainly it’s better to bring up children than to expend all one’s nervous energy in making paintings, but what can you do, I myself am now, at least I feel I am, too old to retrace my steps or to desire something else. This desire has left me, although the moral pain of it remains. I very much regret not having seen Guillaumin again, but it pleases me that he’s seen my canvases. If I’d waited for him I would probably have stayed to talk 
   with him in such a way as to miss my train. Wishing you luck and good heart and relative prosperity, please tell Mother and Sister sometime that I think of them very often, besides this morning I have a letter from them and will reply shortly. Handshakes in thought. Ever yours, Vincent My money won’t last me very long this time, as on my return I had to pay the baggage costs from Arles. I retain very good memories of this trip to Paris. A few months ago I little dared hope to see our friends again. I thought that Dutch lady had a great deal of talent. Lautrec’s painting, portrait of a female musician, is quite astonishing, it moved me when I saw it. My dear brother, Thanks for your letter of today and for the 50-franc note it contained. I’d perhaps like to write to you about many things, but first the desire has passed to such a degree, then I sense the pointlessness of it. I hope that you’ll have found those gentlemen3 favourably disposed towards you. As regards the state of peace in your household, I’m just as convinced of the possibility of preserving it as of the storms that threaten it. I prefer not to forget the little French I know, and certainly wouldn’t see the point of delving deeper into the rights or wrongs in any discussions on one side or the other. It’s just that this wouldn’t interest me. Things go quickly here – aren’t Dries, you and I a little more convinced of that, don’t we feel it a little more than those ladies? So much the better for them – but anyway, talking with rested minds, we can’t even count on that. As for myself, I’m applying myself to my canvases with all my attention, I’m trying to do as well as certain painters whom I’ve liked and admired a great deal.
   What seems to me on my return – is that the painters themselves are increasingly at bay. Very well. But has the moment to make them understand the utility of a union not rather passed already? On the other hand a union, if it were formed, would go under if the rest went under. Then you’d perhaps tell me that dealers would unite for the Impressionists; that would be very fleeting. Anyway it seems to me that personal initiative remains ineffective, and having done the experiment, would one begin it again? I noted with pleasure that the Gauguin from Brittany that I saw was very beautiful, and it seems to me that the others he’s done there must be too. Perhaps you’ll see this croquis of Daubigny’s garden – it’s one of my most deliberate canvases7 – to it I’m adding a croquis of old thatched roofs8 and the croquis of 2 no. 30 canvases depicting immense stretches of wheat after the rain. Hirschig asked me to ask you please to order the attached list of colours for him10 from the same 
   colourman you send me. Tasset can send them directly to him, cash on delivery, but then he would have to be given the 20%. Which would be simplest. Or you’d put them into the consignment of colours for me, adding the invoice or telling me how much they cost, and then he’d send you the money. Here one can’t find anything good in the way of colours. I’ve simplified my own order to a very bare minimum. Hirschig is beginning to understand a little, it has seemed to me, he’s done the portrait of the old schoolmaster, which he gave him, good – and then he has landscape studies11 which are a little like the Konings at your place12 as regards colour. It will become completely like that, perhaps, or like the things by Voerman that we saw together. More soon. Look after yourself, and good luck in business &c. Warm regards to Jo, and handshakes in thought. Yours truly, Vincent.  Daubigny’s garden Foreground of green and pink grass, on the left a green and lilac bush and a stem of plants with whitish foliage. In the middle a bed of roses. To the right a hurdle, a wall, and above the wall a hazel tree with violet foliage. Then a hedge of lilac, a row of rounded yellow lime trees. The house itself in the background, pink with a roof of bluish tiles. A bench and 3 chairs, a dark figure with a yellow hat, and in the foreground a black cat. Sky pale green.
    
    
    Mr V.W. van Gogh c/o W.P. Stokes Esqre 6 Royal Road Ramsgate My dear Theo and dear Jo. In normal circumstances I would certainly have already hoped for a brief line from you in these early days. But considering things as faits accomplis – my word – I think that Theo, Jo and the little one are a little on edge and worn out – besides, I too am far from having arrived at some kind of tranquillity. Often, very often, I think of my little nephew – is he well? Jo will you believe me – if you again happen to have more children, which I hope, don’t have them in town, give birth in the country and stay there until the child is 3 or 4 months old. At present – it seems to me that although the child is no more than 3 months old yet, the milk is already becoming sparse, already you’re like Theo, too tired. I don’t at all want to say exhausted, but anyway troubles are taking up too much room, are too numerous, and you’re sowing among thorns. That’s why I’d have you consider not going to Holland this year, the journey is always very, very costly and it has never done any good. Well yes, it does Mother good, if you like, as she’ll love to see the little one – but she’ll understand and will prefer the little one’s well-being to the pleasure of seeing him. Besides, she won’t lose anything by it, she’ll see him later. But – without daring to say that it might be enough – whatever the case it’s certainly preferable that father, mother and child take an absolute rest in the country for a month. On the other hand, I too greatly fear being confused – and find it strange that I shouldn’t know at all under what conditions I left – if it’s as before at 150 a month in three instalments – Theo didn’t arrange anything, and so to begin with I left in confusion.
   Would there be a way of seeing each other again more calmly – I hope so. But the journey to Holland, I fear that it would be the last straw for all of us. I still foresee that it makes the child suffer later to be brought up in town. Does Jo consider that an exaggeration? I hope so, but anyway I believe that one must be prudent, though. And I say what I think because you well understand that I take an interest in my little nephew and care about his well-being; since you really wanted to name him after me, I’d wish him to have a less anxious soul than mine. Which is foundering. Let’s talk now about Dr Gachet. I went to see him the day before yesterday, I didn’t find him. I’ve been very well the past few days, I’m working hard and have four painted studies and two drawings. You’ll see a drawing of an old vineyard with a figure of a peasant woman. I’m planning to do a large canvas of it. I think that we must in no way count on Dr Gachet. In the first place he’s iller than I am, it seemed to me, or let’s say just as much, there you have it. Now when one blind man leads another blind man, do they not both fall into the ditch? I don’t know what to say. Certainly my last crisis, which was terrible, was due in considerable part to the influence of the other patients, anyway, the prison was crushing me, and père Peyron didn’t pay the slightest attention to it, leaving me to vegetate with the rest, who were profoundly corrupted. 
   I can have lodgings, 3 small rooms at 150 a year. This if I don’t find better, and I hope to find better, is in any case preferable to the bedbug-infested hole at Tanguy’s, and besides I’d find a shelter myself there and could retouch the canvases that need it. In such a way the paintings will be less spoiled, and by keeping them in order the chance of deriving some profit from them would increase. For – I’m not talking about my own – but the Bernard, Prévost, Russell, Guillaumin, Jeannin canvases that ended up there – that’s not the place for them. Now canvases like those – once again I’m not talking about my own – are merchandise which has and will retain a certain value, and neglecting it is one of the causes of our mutual financial embarrassment. It rather saddens me to have to insist that you send me at least part of my month right at the beginning. But I’ll still do all I can to ensure that all goes well. It’s certain, I think, that we’re all thinking of the little one, and Jo must just say what she wants, I dare believe that Theo, like me, will go along with her opinion. Myself, all I can do at the moment is say that I think that we all need some rest. I feel – a failure – that’s it as regards me – I feel that that’s the fate I’m accepting. And which won’t change any more. But one more reason, setting aside all ambition, we can live together for years without ruining ourselves on either side. You see that with the canvases that are still in St-Rémy – there are at least 8 of them9 – and with the 4 from here, I’m trying not to lose my touch. That, though, is the absolute 
   truth, it’s difficult to acquire a certain facility of production, and by ceasing to work I would lose it much more quickly, more easily than it cost me in troubles to acquire it. And the prospect darkens, I don’t see a happy future at all. Write to me by return of post if you haven’t already written, and good handshakes in thought, I would hope that it might be possible to see each other soon with more rested minds. Vincent. Dear brother and sister, My impression is that as we’re all a little dazed, and moreover all working quite hard, it’s relatively unimportant to insist on having very clear-cut definitions of the position in which we find ourselves. You surprise me a little, seeming to want to force the situation, being in disagreement. 
   Can I do anything about it – perhaps not – but have I done something wrong, or anyway can I do something or other that you would like? Whatever the case, again a good handshake in thought – and it nevertheless gave me a lot of pleasure to see you all again. Be very much assured of that. Yours truly, V. My dear brother, Thanks for your kind letter and for the 50-franc note it contained. I’d really like to write to you about many things, but I sense the pointlessness of it. I hope that you’ll have found those gentlemen favourably disposed towards you. You didn’t need to reassure me as to the state of peace of your household. I believe I’ve seen the good as much as the other side. And besides, am so much in agreement that raising a kid in a fourth floor apartment is hard labour, as much for you as for Jo. Since that’s going well, which is the main thing, should I go on about things of lesser importance? My word, there’s probably a long way to go before there’s a chance of talking business with more rested minds. That’s the only thing I can say at the moment, and that for my part I realized it with a certain horror, I haven’t yet hidden it, but that really is all.
   The other painters, whatever they think about it, instinctively keep their distance from discussions on current trade. Ah well, really we can only make our paintings speak. But however, my dear brother, there’s this that I’ve always told you, and I tell you again once more with all the gravity that can be imparted by the efforts of thought assiduously fixed on trying to do as well as one can – I tell you again that I’ll always consider that you’re something other than a simple dealer in Corots, that through my intermediacy you have your part in the very production of certain canvases, which even in calamity retain their calm. For that’s where we are, and that’s all, or at least the main thing I can have to tell you in a moment of relative crisis. In a moment when things are very tense between dealers in paintings – by dead artists – and living artists. Ah well, I risk my life for my own work and my reason has half foundered in it – very well – 
   but you’re not one of the dealers in men; as far as I know and can judge I think you really act with humanity, but what can you do 