The Hague, 7 Sept. 1875 My dear Vincent, Weehuizen died last spring. I thought you knew. He died very suddenly, after being ill for a couple of days. He died in hospital without anyone with him. I very much regretted not being with him. I had been with him a lot before then. He had read the book by Michelet, ‘L’amour’, and had talked a lot about it with me; he thought it so beautiful, and he loved nature so much 
   and sought in it a quiet melancholy. Last Sunday I heard a beautiful sermon. Jesus wept. I thank you for the lithographs and the book by Michel that you’ve promised me;3 I’m eager to see them. I gave your letter to Borchers, they look like good people. I hope to go there more often. Today we received the nouveautés, which included the print after Rembrandt. It looks beautiful, the figure of Jesus, in particular, is beautiful, and the whole is noble. Adieu, I wish you well. Your loving Theo The frames for the engravings for Ma’s birthday5 cost 4 guilders apiece. Ivy-Cottage Welwyn, 30 Dec. 1875. Dearest Vincent, Thanks for what you sent, how sweet of you to think of us in this way. Here chocolate is also thought of as Real Consolation, especially by Nelly. The pictures2 have also been put to good use. We got a great deal of satisfaction from our Christmas tree at school. It was a great joy to see such happy faces, 
   so you can take satisfaction from what you sent, because I wouldn’t have been able to make something for everyone without those little photographs. I’m sending this letter to you to ask you to put Willemien’s portrait and our letters on Pa and Ma’s places when they come home from church on New Year’s Eve. I sincerely hope that you’ll have had a pleasant holiday at home. When will we see each other again? I hope very much that we may all be together on 21 May. Sometime I must ask your advice about this and that, but I’ll wait until you’re safely back in Paris. And now this year is almost over and we’re starting another. May it be a happy and blessed year for all of us, and may our love for God and one another grow. I wish you well, too, and receive in thought a hearty kiss from –  Yours, your loving Anna.  Paris, 5 Jan. 1882 My dear Vincent, I received your two letters and thank you for keeping me informed about how things are going. I think it very good that you’re permanently installed in The Hague, and hope to do as much as I can to help you until you can start earning yourself, but what I don’t like is the way you’ve contrived to leave Pa and Ma.(1)2 It’s possible that you couldn’t bear to stay there, and it’s no more than natural that you differ in your way of thinking from people who have spent their whole lives in the country 
   and haven’t had the opportunity to partake of modern life, but what the devil made you so childish and so shameless as to contrive in this way to make Pa and Ma’s life miserable and nearly impossible?(2) It isn’t difficult to fight with someone who’s already weary.(3) When Pa wrote to me about it, I thought it was a misunderstanding, but you yourself say in your letter, As far as the relations between Pa and me are concerned, they can’t be put to rights so quickly.(4) Don’t you know him, and don’t you know that Pa can’t live as long as there’s bad blood between the two of you?(5) It’s your duty to set things straight at all costs, and I assure you that some day you’ll mightily regret having handled this matter so harshly.(6) Now you have Mauve who attracts you, and because you carry things too far, anyone who isn’t like him doesn’t appeal to you, because you’re looking for the same qualities in everyone.(7) Is it not hard for Pa to see himself reduced to nothing by someone who professes to be more free-thinking(8) than him, and whom he probably occasionally envies deep down for his keener perception?(9) Does his life 
   count for nothing?(10) I don’t understand you.(11) Write to me again when you can,(12) and give my regards to Mauve and Jet. Always Ever yours, Theo Utrecht, 24 May ’85 My dear friend! It gave me great pleasure to receive a sign of life from you again, even if that sign wasn’t entirely as I’d have wanted it to be. The news of the death of your father came so unexpectedly that I very much wanted some further message, which didn’t come, however. If I remember rightly, my superficial manner of reading newspapers, where the advertisements always go by the board, was the only reason that I didn’t learn the news from the Nieuws van den Dag 
   first. At any rate, I know that very, very shortly after receiving the formal announcement, I called on a friend who had already read it in the newspaper! Did you think that I had so little interest in your father or in the events in your family that a common polite formula to announce something so affecting was enough for that interest? Then you were seriously mistaken. In connection with what you’ve now sent me, I return briefly to your last letter, in which you talk about the art of expressing oneself well in words. I wanted to point out to you that, poorly as may I do it verbally, I can do it well 
   in writing, if I take pains. What I wrote to you about your manner of working expresses exactly what I think — even though I didn’t in fact take very great pains with that, but the only consequence has been a less beautiful style! I hoped and I still hope that I’m mistaken in my opinion of your manner of working; but for this very reason I’m really sorry to have to see in what you’ve now sent me so complete a confirmation of my opinion that I myself was shocked by it. You’ll agree with me that such work isn’t intended seriously. You can do better than this — fortunately; but why, then, observe and treat everything so superficially? Why not study the movements? Now they’re posing. 
   That coquettish little hand of that woman at the back, how untrue! And what connection is there between the coffeepot, the table and the hand lying on top of the handle? What’s that pot doing, for that matter; it isn’t standing, it isn’t being held, but what then? And why may that man on the right not have a knee or a belly or lungs? Or are they in his back? And why must his arm be a metre too short? And why must he lack half of his nose? And why must the woman on the left have a sort of little pipe stem with a cube on it for a nose? And with such a manner of working you dare to invoke the names of Millet and Breton? Come on! Art is too important, it seems to me, to be treated so cavalierly. Adieu, believe me ever Your friend A.G.A. van Rappard Dear Sir, If you come on my behalf you will find at Cluzel’s, the framer in rue Fontaine, a painting that I have delivered for you (for our exchange). If you do not consider it suitable, let me know, and come and choose yourself. Forgive me if I do not come to collect your paintings myself, I am so rarely in your part of town. I shall collect them from 19 boulevard Montmartre4 if you will be so kind as to leave them there. Yours, Paul Gauguin My dear Vincent, I wanted to write to your brother but I know you see each other every day1 and I’m afraid to trouble him, occupied as he is with business from morning till night. I have left to work in Brittany (always the rage to paint), and I had high hopes of having funds for that. The little I’ve sold went to pay off some pressing debts, and in a month I’m going to find myself with nothing. Zero 
   is a negative power. I don’t want to put pressure on your brother, but a brief word from you on this subject would set my mind at rest, or at least enable me to hold on. My God, how terrible these money matters are for an artist! And if we have to make some reductions don’t worry, as long as I find some funds. I’ve just spent a fortnight in bed, struck down again by fever, and I’m getting back to work. If I can eke things out for 
   5 or 6 months I think I’ll bring back some good canvases. A word of encouragement in reply if possible. Ever yours, Paul Gauguin Pont-Aven, at Madame Gloanec’s Finistère5 My dear Vincent Thank you for replying;1 I see that you’re in a good spot to study the sun that enchants you, and you’re working all the better because the subject grips you.  Thank you again for your good will towards me;2 the trade in paintings is so hard in our day and age. Despite that, I’m in a state of constant agony here; money worries are the only ones that have an effect on me, and unfortunately 
   I believe I’m fated always to suffer from them.  Pont-Aven is very dreary at the moment because of the bad weather, continual wind and rain, and I’m waiting for the fine days to get back to work, which I’ve neglected a bit owing to illness. A cordial handshake. Paul Gauguin Pont-Aven — Pension Gloanec My dear Vincent I’ve just read your interesting letter and I entirely agree with you on the slight importance that accuracy contributes to art. Art is an abstraction; unfortunately we’re becoming increasingly misunderstood. I would very much like it if we were to achieve our aims, that is, my coming to Provence. I’ve always had an itch to interpret bullfights in my own way, as I understand them. I’m beginning to recover the full use of my faculties: my illness had weakened me, and in my most recent studies I have, I think, gone beyond what I’ve been doing up to now. Of course, the collection of boors around here think I’m completely mad and I’m happy about that, because it proves to me that I’m not. I’ve just finished a 
   Breton wrestling that I’m sure you’ll like.   Two kids, one pair of blue trunks and one pair of vermilion. One at top right, coming up out of the water. A green lawn – pure Veronese shading off into chrome yellow with no execution, like Japanese prints. At the top a cascade of foaming water, 
   white pink, and a rainbow on the edge near the frame. At the bottom a white patch, a black hat and blue smock. Talking of Russell, Granchi2 told me he’d seen him 2 months ago in Paris, and that Russell had great admiration for me and that he was to go to Belle-Île. I don’t quite understand why a rich man doesn’t buy what he admires. Anyway, let’s hope. So who is this Thomas you speak of, is it Thomas de Bojano? Unless it’s the dealer who used to be near place Vendôme. My friend Laval is back from Martinique; he brought some very curious watercolours. I’ll have you look at some that you’ll like, they’re art. I’m talking as if we were already together. I have to tell you that once I’ve 
   taken a decision I’m always in haste to carry it out. If it weren’t for this damned money, my bags would soon be packed. I don’t know why, but for the past ten days or so I have lots of painted follies in my head which I plan to execute in the south: I think it has to do with my state of health, which is blooming again. It’s as if I have a need to struggle, to hack away with crushing blows — after all the research I’ve done here I think I can easily forge ahead. Until we’re together, an affectionate handshake. Paul Gauguin Belle-Ile-en-Mer Morbihan — July 22 My dear Vincent, Excuse not answering your letter of some week or two ago. I’ve been much worried by the changing to this island. Packing up and other things. It is most good of you to give Monsieur Gauguin a leg up. Not knowing the man I can’t say if he deserves it. I hope so for your sake. 
   I would like to help you. But how? There is but one legitimate way. i.e. By purchasing one of his works. The very last day in Paris I tried to fetch Boussod; Valadon & Cie to see the picture you speak of, ‘niggers &c.’, but failed through want of time. For others I saw, that big one of yours3 unfortunately swamps them in my opinion. So I am in a fix. 
   Young Bernard writes me from Saint-Briac. Complains much of the weather interfering with his work. Before I left Paris I lunched with Mr Rodin (who has finished a fine head of my wife)4 and Mr Claude Monet. Saw ten of Mr Monet’s pictures done at Antibes. Very fine in color and light and a certain richness of envelop. But like nearly all the so-called Impressionist work the form is not enough 
   studied. The big mass of form I mean. The trees too much wood in Branches for the size of Trunk and so against fundamental law of nature. A lack of construction everywhere.  He is undoubtedly a remarkable colorist. and full of courage in attacking difficult problems. We should all do the same. It is the only way to get strong. Luckily here in Belle-Île I am forced to try all things — figures, landscape, sea, cattle &c. &c. otherwise would My dear Vincent I received your letter the very moment I was about to write to you. Excuse me if I write so infrequently and so briefly. I’m terribly bored and I’m suffering from stomach trouble; we have rain constantly. I work and I do nothing, in the sense that I draw with hand, head and heart, with a view to what I wish to do later. Yes, you’re right to wish for painting with a coloration suggesting poetic ideas, and in that sense I’m in agreement with you, with one difference. I don’t know any poetic ideas, it’s probably a sense that I lack. I find EVERYTHING poetic, and it’s in the corners of my heart which are sometimes mysterious that I catch a glimpse of poetry. Forms and colours brought into harmonies create a form of poetry in themselves. Without allowing myself to be surprised by the subject, when looking at a painting by someone else, I feel a sensation that leads me into a poetic state depending on whether the painter’s intellectual powers emanate from it. There’s no point quibbling about it; we’ll talk about it at length. In that respect, I’m very despondent at being detained at Pont-Aven; my debt is increasing every day, and making my journey more and more unlikely. The artist’s life is one long Calvary to go through! And that’s perhaps what makes us live. Passion enlivens us, and we die when it has nothing more to feed on. Let’s leave 
   these paths full of thorny bushes, but they have their wild poetry all the same. I’m studying young Bernard, whom I don’t know as well as you do; I believe you’ll do him good, and he needs it. He has suffered, of course, and he’s starting out in life full of bile, ready to see man’s bad side. I hope that with his intelligence and his love of art he’ll see one day that goodness is a force against others, and a consolation for our own ills. He likes you and respects you, so you can have a good influence on him. We need to be very united in heart and in intellect if we wish the future to put us in our true place. Is your brother travelling? I have no more news from him. Cordially yours, Paul Gauguin My dear Vincent I’m very late in replying to you;1 but what can I say, my sickly state and my worries often leave me in a state of prostration, in which I sink into inaction. If you were familiar with my life you would understand that after having struggled so much (in every way) I’m in the process of drawing breath, and at the moment I’m lying dormant. Your idea for an exchange, to which I haven’t yet replied, appeals to me, and I’ll do the portrait you want, but not yet. I’m not in a fit state to do it, seeing that it’s not a copy of a face that you want, but a portrait as I understand it. 
   I’m studying young Bernard, and I don’t have him yet. I shall perhaps do it from memory, but in any case it will be an abstraction. Perhaps tomorrow, I don’t know, it will come to me all at once. At the moment there’s a spell of fine weather which is leading us both to try lots of things. I’ve just done a religious painting, very badly done, but which was interesting to do, and which I like. I wanted to give it to the church at Pont-Aven. They don’t want it, of course. Breton women, grouped together, are praying; costumes very intense black. The yellow-white bonnets very luminous. 
   The two bonnets on the right are like monstrous helmets. An apple tree goes across the canvas: dark purple, and the foliage drawn in masses like emerald green clouds, with yellow-green interstices of sunlight. The earth (pure vermilion). At the church it goes down and becomes red brown. The angel is dressed in violent ultramarine blue, and Jacob in bottle green. The angel’s wings pure no. 1 chrome yellow. The angel’s hair no. 2 chrome, and the feet flesh-orange. I believe I’ve achieved a great rustic and superstitious simplicity in the figures. The whole 
   very severe. The cow under the tree is tiny by comparison with reality, and is prancing. For me, the landscape and the wrestling exist only in the imagination of the people at prayer after the sermon; that’s why there’s a contrast between the real people and the wrestling in its landscape, not real and out of proportion. In your letter you seem angry at our laziness about the portrait, and that pains me; friends don’t get angry with each other (at a distance, words cannot be interpreted at their true value). Another thing. You turn 
   the dagger in the wound when you do all you can to prove to me that I must come to the south, given that I’m suffering on account of not being there at this moment. When you suggested that I go there as part of your partnership I categorically wrote you a last letter in the affirmative, happy at your brother’s offer. There’s no question for me of creating a studio in the north, since every day I hope for a sale that will allow me to leave here. The people who are feeding me here, the doctor who treated me, did it on credit and wouldn’t hold back a single 
   painting, a single piece of clothing, and are faultless towards me — I can’t leave them without committing a bad deed that would trouble me enormously. If they were either rich or thieves, it would mean nothing to me. So I shall wait. On the other hand, if when the day came you were otherwise disposed, and you had to say to me, Too late I’d prefer that you did it right away. I’m fearful that your brother, who likes my talent, rates it too highly. If he found a collector or speculator who was tempted by low prices, let him do it. I’m a man of sacrifices, and 
   I’d like him to understand that whatever he does, I’ll find it well done. Young Bernard will shortly be taking several canvases of mine to Paris. Laval expects to come and find me in the south towards the month of February. He’s found someone who’ll pay him 150 francs a month for a year. It appears to me now, my dear Vincent, that you’re getting your sums wrong. I know the prices in the south; aside from the restaurant, I undertake to keep the household going on 200 francs a month, with food for three. I have kept house, and I know how to get by. 
   All the more so with four. As far as accommodation goes; apart from yours, Laval and Bernard could have a small furnished room nearby. I like the way you picture your dream house and its arrangement, and my mouth is watering to see it. Ah well! As far as possible I don’t want to think any more about the promised fruit. Waiting for better times, unless I’m released from this lousy existence, which, aside from work, weighs on me so horribly. Cordially yours, P. Gauguin  My dear Vincent We’ve satisfied your desire; in a different way, it’s true, but what does it matter, since the result is the same? Our 2 portraits. Having no silver white, I used lead white, and it could well happen that the colour becomes darker and heavier. And besides, it’s not done exclusively from the point of view of colour. I feel the need to explain what I was trying to do, not that you’re not capable of guessing by yourself, but because I don’t believe that I’ve achieved it in my work. The mask of a thief, badly dressed and powerful like Jean Valjean, who has his nobility and inner gentleness. The rutting blood floods the face, and the tones of a fiery smithy, which surround the eyes, 
   suggest the red-hot lava that sets our painters’ souls ablaze. The drawing of the eyes and the nose, like the flowers in Persian carpets, epitomizes an abstract and symbolic art. That girlish little background, with its childish flowers, is there to testify to our artistic virginity. And that Jean Valjean, whom society oppresses, outlawed; with his love, his strength, isn’t he too the image of an Impressionist today? By doing him with my features, you have my individual image, as well as a portrait of us all, poor victims of society, taking our revenge on it by doing good — ah! my dear Vincent, you would have plenty to amuse you, 
   seeing all these painters here, pickled in their mediocrity like gherkins in vinegar. Makes no difference whether they’re fat, long or twisted and warty, they’re still, and will always be, nitwit gherkins. Eugène, just look at him! Eugène, that’s Habert, Habert’s the one who killed Dupuis, you know... And his pretty wife and his old mother, and the whole bloody lot! And Eugène paints, writes for the newspapers, travels free in First class, sir. There’s enough there to make you laugh till you cry. Aside from his art, what a lousy existence, and was it worth the trouble that Jesus died for all these lousy buffoons? As an artist, yes; 
   as a reformer, I don’t believe so. Our pal Bernard is working and making plans to come to Arles too. Laval, whom you don’t know, but who knows you through your letters and our little bits of gossip, joins us in shaking your hand. Yours, Paul Gauguin 


Burning sun who settest all ablaze

 


halt thy furious race
For a penny


without ado I wish
whistle6


to paint thine orange face.
 


  19 October 1888 My dear Vincent, It’s indeed quite a serious oversight on my part to have spoken to you about De Haan and Isaäcson and not to have said what they’ve already done. I wanted above all to keep you au courant with what kind of people they are. The large painting, I haven’t seen it, but judging by a photograph taken of a drawing, 
   it shouldn’t have been as bad as all that. The subject is Uriel Acosta before a tribunal; it’s a scene from Jewish history. The composition has nothing of Rembrandt about it, as the light isn’t concentrated on part of the painting but well spread all over it; however, as the costumes are from that period, people said it was a poor imitation of Rembrandt. It’s certain that he has been subject to his influence, but even so, there’s a really personal quality in what I’ve seen of him; it’s the way of spreading the light throughout his drawing. It’s mainly charcoal drawings that I’ve seen, their things having stayed in Holland. 
   I’ll send you two photos of the drawings, so that you can judge; the photos have come out very badly, because the drawings are matt. They consider Breitner one of the strongest of the Dutch today; I don’t believe they put him above J. Maris, but well above Israëls. I believe that if you knew them you’d share my view, and that you wouldn’t have suspicions. I’ve seen nothing of Isaäcson yet apart from his croquis, which are very good and very original. He’s waiting for some drawings that should come back from London. Seurat isn’t in town yet, and I don’t know what he’s doing. He’s very strong, that fellow, and I agree with you that his carefully chosen frame was well worth all manner of expensive frames. Recently I’ve 
   read Tartarin de Tarascon, which I find very fine, and Le Nabab, which I like much less. I’ll read the other Tartarin as well. Madame Chrysanthème7 isn’t in the library, but somebody has promised to let me have it to read. I’m curious to know it. It’s very annoying that you’ve had trouble with your eyes; where does that come from? So Gauguin’s coming; that will make a big change in your life. I hope that your efforts will succeed in making your house a place where artists will feel at home.  I’ll stop, because otherwise the letter won’t go off this evening. Yours truly, Theo  23 Oct. 1888 My dear Vincent, It pains me to learn that you’re not well. You must have worked too much and that way forgotten to take care of your body as one should. I’m glad that your letter1 came today and no later, because I would soon have left for Brussels, and you’d have had to wait another two days, at least. What a financier 
   you are! What distresses me is that even so, you’re still in poverty, because you can’t stop yourself doing things for others. I’d be very glad to see you more selfish until you’re on an even keel. You understand that père Thomas has sent me packing; it should have been you — who took the initiative, and even then. Now let’s try to get ourselves out of it anyway; others will come looking for us of their own accord. What will please you is that I’ve sold Gauguin’s large painting, the Breton women, which had been deposited with Diot. I’m sending him 500 francs for it and so he’ll be solvent for the moment, but will he come to join you? This 
   week De Haan is coming to live with me, which I’m delighted about, because it’s likely that some time from now it will be he who will form the nucleus of the group of young people here. In your previous letter you seem to believe that these people have the edge in questions of art in the manner of the Dutch, but it’s my fault if you had this impression. When I told you that they knew how to analyze a painting by taking account of the sentiment, technique, etc., I didn’t want to go so far as to say that they separate these qualities, but rather I wanted to tell you the unusual clarity of mind that they have in not confusing things. Isaäcson, especially, strikes me as a real scholar. They’ve received paintings and studies made in Holland; very good, but a bit dark. They 
   intend to stay in Paris for the winter and to leave for the country as soon as the weather’s good enough for working outside. I expect to be back from Brussels on Friday or Saturday, and I’ll write to you shortly at greater leisure. I hope that what’s wrong with you isn’t serious and that you won’t lose heart, even if Gauguin didn’t come. Yours, Theo 27 Oct. 1888 My dear Vincent, On returning from Brussels I find your telegram and your letter;1 in reply to the first, which gave me great pleasure, I’m sending you a money order, because although it’s possible that Gauguin has received the letter that I addressed to Pont-Aven, thinking him still over there, the possibility exists that the two of you may not have received it, that it may be even more difficult for two together than one alone to have enough to live on. Why don’t you try to obtain credit with the owner of a restaurant for occasions when, as just recently, I’m not there, or am 
   unable to send you money immediately? I’m very, very pleased that Gauguin is with you, because I was afraid he’d found some obstacle to his coming. Now, from your letter I can see that you’re ill and that you’re giving yourself masses of worries. I must tell you something once and for all. To me it’s as if the matter of money and sales of paintings and the whole financial side doesn’t exist, or rather, that it exists like an illness. Since it’s certain that the money question won’t disappear before a tremendous revolution, or probably several revolutions, we have to treat it like the pox, if we have it. That’s to say, take precautions against the accidents that can result from it, but otherwise not worry oneself sick about it. You’ve been thinking about it too much recently, and even though there’s no symptom of an accident, you’re suffering as a result. By accidents I mean poverty, and so it’s important, in order to avoid it, 
   to tread carefully, not to overdo it, and to avoid other kinds of illness as far as possible. You talk about money that you owe me and and that you wish to pay back to me. I know nothing of that. What I’d like to see you achieve would be that you never had that concern. I must work to earn money. Since the two of us don’t have much of it, we mustn’t overburden ourselves, but taking that into consideration we can hold out for some time yet, even without selling this or that. If you feel the need to do a great deal of work for yourself, good, say so, and I think we’ll be able to manage anyway, but I don’t understand the calculation of so many paintings at 100 francs, if we want them to be worth 100 francs; they’re worth nothing, because this unworthy society is only on the side of those who have no need of it. But knowing that, let’s do likewise and say, we have no need of it. 
   Is not forewarned forearmed? You can, if you wish, do something for me; that’s to continue as in the past and create for us a circle of artists and friends, something which I’m utterly incapable of doing by myself and which you, however, have more or less created since you’ve been in France. If the artists start out, will the others not follow when we need them, at a time when we can no longer work as at present? I’m firmly convinced of it, myself. You don’t know how you grieve me when you say that you’ll have worked so much that you’ll feel that you haven’t lived. First of all, I believe that isn’t true, because you are in fact living, and in the same way as great men and noblemen. But for pity’s sake, let me know in good time, so that I don’t feel that you’ve been in poverty and that you’ve been ill because you didn’t have a crust of bread to live on. I hope that Gauguin’s company will be pleasant for you and that you’ll soon recover. I haven’t received his 
   canvases yet. Did he send them, or should they reach me via someone? In Brussels I met Degroux’s son, who’s also an artist. Unfortunately it was the last evening I was there and so I couldn’t see what he’s done. The movement that’s being formed here in art seems much debated but also approved of over there, and it would be good to create a permanent exhibition in Brussels as well. De Haan’s coming to live with me tomorrow, which I’m very pleased about; I’m very curious to know what he’s going to do, because he’s eager to get down to work right away. You’ll find enclosed a letter from our mother, which she asks me to pass on to you. Tasset will send you the colours and the canvas shortly. More soon, and good handshake, to Gauguin as well. Theo 11 December. My dear friend, I haven’t written to you for such a long time that I feel the need to tell you a thousand things to gain forgiveness for my silence. However I’ll begin by asking you to accept my apologies. Since my arrival here1 I’ve toiled and continue to toil like a negro, hence from six o’clock in the morning to four thirty in the afternoon, I scarcely leave the barracks for long enough to eat 
  , I spend the whole time standing in the blazing sun, shouting like a devil, so in the evening it’s with a certain pleasure that I see the moment coming when I can slide between the sheets, hence my shortage of time to write. I shan’t tell you about my journey, which went very well. Pointless. Like all other countries, Algeria is only interesting for the visitor, from far away, like this, on paper, it comes across badly. Is that true? 
   I’ve been thinking about Bernard. I’ve been working on his behalf as much as possible. The officer who commands my battalion is very well disposed towards him after what I said about him. Tell your friend to come to the 3rd Zouaves, he’ll then surely be near me, and when he does we’ll try to make his life as gentle as the job permits. It’s a great pity that he isn’t here now, 
   because being in charge of the recruits as I am, the task would be a hell of a lot more simplified still. Guelma is an absolutely indifferent town: any small village in France would be as pleasant. What really is beautiful is nature, the sun, the light, the types of Arabs, these people with billowing robes are superb. But what astonishes me is that, contrary to what you see in Europe, the paintings seem to be composed in the shade with a dark centre 
   and corners in the light. It’s just like, if I dare say so, Rembrandt in reverse. At least that’s how I feel about things. From my window I have a superb view: my horizon is formed by a line of small mountains running parallel from east to west and lost in the blue. From another side, I have a perfectly flat stretch of ground, of a rather indefinable colour, the areas nearest to the eye are yellowish; 
   the parts that fade into the distance melt into violet greys (does this colour actually exist? In any case that’s what it seems to me), one last ash-grey line, but so thin it would take only a single slender stroke, determines the true depth of the countryside, which is truly very extensive. All of this is marvellous. I wish I could draw so as to depict it, but I can’t, alas. How are you 
   my dear friend, and how is Gauguin finding life down there? Is he getting used to it? Write to me, if you have the time, you’ll give me very great pleasure. Of course, I haven’t a single book to cast my eyes over, not even Balzacs at 1 franc 2 sous each. What a hole, what a hole! On top of that, impossible to get any. Have you unearthed Bel-ami?
   Recall me, if you would, to your esteemed brother’s excellent memory. Hearty handshake for Gauguin, and believe me, my dear friend, your entirely devoted and faithful P. Milliet 2nd Lieut. 3rd Zouaves Guelma Place de Constantine. Winschoten1 31 December 1888 My dear friend! You have heard nothing from me for a long time. Now I wish you herewith a happy New Year, and will shortly reply to your letter that I received this summer. Adieu, more soon A.H. Koning Engaged Theodorus van Gogh and  Johanna Bonger 


January 1889

Paris


Amsterdam

 Reception Wednesday, 9 January Weteringschans 1211  your sunflowers on a yellow background1 which I regard as a perfect page of an essential ‘Vincent’ style. At your brother’s home I saw your Sower, which is very good, as well as a yellow still life, apples and lemons. Your brother gave me a lithographed reproduction of an old painting of yours, Dutch – very interesting as regards colour in the drawing. In my studio5 next to your portrait. The grape harvests7 are totally covered in scales as a result of the white which has separated. I’ve stuck all of it back down using 
   a process shown to me by the reliner. If I tell you about it it’s because the thing is easy to do and can be very good for those of your canvases that need retouching – you stick newspapers on your canvas with flour paste. Once dry, you put your canvas on a smooth board and with very hot irons you press down hard on it. All the breaks in your colour will remain but will be flattened down and you’ll have a very fine surface. Afterwards you soak your paper covering well and take off all the paper. That’s largely the whole secret of relining. 
   Thank Roulin for thinking of me. I have indeed received my stretcher keys9 – at the next opportunity if you can send me by parcel post my 2 fencing masks and gloves, which I left on the shelf in the little upstairs room. Friendly wishes from me to everyone. Cordially yours, Paul Gauguin At Mr Schuffenecker’s 29 rue Boulard – My dear Vincent Don’t bother yourself with the studies that I deliberately left in Arles as not being worth the trouble of transporting them. On the other hand the sketchbooks2 contain notes which are useful to me, and I accept your offer to send them to me. As well as the 2 masks and gloves3 — c/o Mr Schuffenecker 29 rue Boulard Milliet’s address is 2nd lieutenant 3rd Zouaves Guelma — Place de Constantine Algeria 
   I regret that I inadvertently took it with me (all my apologies). I’ve seen Bernard twice since I arrived in Paris. He has a very good chance of not being a soldier because of his narrow chest, and he won’t know his fate until the end of February. It appears that his father is bothering him more and more on account of the painting and the unfortunate letter I wrote to his family. No, I haven’t done any portraits yet, having spent my time on errands. Now that I have a studio in which I sleep, I’m going to put myself to work. I’ve begun a 
   series of lithographs to be published in order to get myself known. Moreover, it’s on your brother’s advice and under his auspices. I’m going to buckle down to the portraits of the whole Schuffenecker family, he, his wife and his 2 children in vermilion aprons. It’s darned cold in Paris at the moment — in addition I’ve amused myself doing croquis at the market, and I’m going to get some porters from the market to pose with their big hats, carrying sacks and sides of meat. I’m carried away at top speed by it. I don’t know if I’ll go to 
   Brussels, everything will depend on the money situation, and that’s as clear as mud. In any case, if I go there I’ll remember the advice you gave me about it — I don’t know, for example, if my weak voice will be heard. In any case the common good interests me enormously, and I’ll try to do the right thing. Cordially yours, Paul Gauguin Holbaekgaard pr1 Ørsted. Jutland. Denmark. 25 Jan. 1889. My dear Van Gogh! I received your kind letter in Holland and, now that my journey is over, I thank you very much for your friendship and for having thought of me. The stay in your brother’s place has done me good, and I would be very happy if I’ve been able to contribute to lessening that emptiness around him that one so easily experiences in Paris. In your country I made two copies after Rembrandt: ‘the Suzanne’ in The Hague and    later ‘the Jewish wedding’ in Amsterdam. It’s the first time I’ve made copies, and I won’t do so again. It doesn’t say anything to me, if it wasn’t to have a memory of these magnificent masterpieces. There are some talented painters among your compatriots, and the works of Mauve, Israëls and Breitner interested me very much, only it seems to me that they don’t make sufficient effort to see with their own eyes. As for the Scandinavian painters, I found them the same as before my departure. Among the young ones there are many who want to produce something original and 
   who are close to the Impressionists, but they’ve elected a reactionary and stupid jury which brings all progress to a halt. I think that an Impressionist exhibition would do some good in Copenhagen by ridding us of certain conventions. We’ve already seen Claude Monet and Besnard5 – may others come! At the moment the consignment for the Paris exhibition is being prepared – it’s said to be very good. I would be happy to know if you are still staying in Arles, if everything is going well down there etc., but you’ve probably had enough of it, and this letter will find you in Paris.
   As for me, I must stay here this summer at least. If it’s possible next winter I’ll go to Paris, and I hope to see you again then. How is your brother’s health? Please say hello to him from me. I hope to send him something soon. Adieu – good health and good luck. I shake your hand. Chr. Mourier-Petersen. The Hague 15 February 1889. My dear Vincent, I recently received your letter while I was staying in Winschoten. Although the letter gave me great pleasure, I found your report that you had been ill in hospital much less pleasant. Have you perhaps been working too much; because with a compulsion to work such as you have it’s quite possible that one does too much, and then in such a hot climate. But according to everyone who’s stayed in the south of France, what the summer there gives in too much abundance is glorious, that’s to say the wonderful warmth in the winter. I’m therefore thinking very seriously of visiting you if nothing comes up to prevent it. For the time being I’ve made a plan with a friend to go to Paris in the late autumn, when one can no longer 
   paint outdoors here, also to see the exhibition, and then we’ll be very close to you and won’t be much inclined to go back to our chilly watery country. It’s filthy weather here at the moment, no shortage of hail, snow and squalls. I’m steadily extricating myself and paint despite the snags, often things that I don’t find particularly good myself, but for which I’m paid. This is less enjoyable, but I don’t have any complaints yet, because there’s a great deal of time left when I can work for myself. According to what people are saying here, I’ve become very forceful in my colour. My stay in Paris3 has brought about a wholesale reorganization as regards my thinking about the colours and their mutual relationship, and I just keep quietly going on along the road I’ve taken and which I think to be the best. The friend of mine with whom I’m going to Paris, and perhaps to the south, is a young man of great skill and originality, great admirer of Claude Monet. Apropos, speaking of the latter master — some days ago I was with my Roessingh relations in Haarlem and, as usual, the conversation turned to art and artists, when my cousin Cato van de Stadt suddenly says, ‘Yes we also know a French painter and his wife who used to come and paint 
   in Zaandam. They’re great friends of ours and our family in Zaandam,’4 and, what a coincidence, there in my cousin’s album in Haarlem I find the portraits of Claude Monet and his wife;5 of someone whose work I so admired in Paris. According to Theo, Breitner was the greatest Dutch genius. It does me good to hear a connoisseur like Theo do justice to a Dutchman of such a great reputation, all the same aren’t Jaap and Willem and Thijs Maris and Israëls fellows who uphold the fame of the Dutch school of painting with honour? I recently saw a study by Israëls. At the exhibition in Rotterdam, an impression of a stormy, showery evening with a shepherd and sheep, a 
   tremendously fine thing. It’s sold, I read recently (in the Handelsblad?), for four thousand guilders, and this is certainly a very great deal for a study. As a great interpreter of the fine grey Dutch countryside, Mauve is certainly at the top. Edzard (my brother) and I were recently able to acquire some reproductions of drawings by the deceased master, a timber auction after a watercolour. Also two watercolours with sheep on the heath. If I ever go to Amsterdam I’ll be sure to look Breitner up, but I almost never go to A. if I don’t need anything there. I think Amsterdam’s an even lousier city than The Hague. As regards sending one or more of my studies: I’ll be delighted to do so, even though it’s a great distance. I’m also engaged in the art trade nowadays in association with my 
  brother. We have a painting by Willem Maris, a large watercolour by Roelofs. Further, I also have various drawings by Bauer and one by De Zwart and one by Thorn Prikker (all top cracks). Do you happen to know Tholen too, someone with a great deal of talent I’m quite good friends with? And now I just get an announcement from Theodoor of his forthcoming marriage to Miss Bonger. I’m immensely pleased that the good fellow’s getting married. I wrote him a letter during his stay in A. I had just then arrived in Winschoten, otherwise I would have been represented there in person. Well, I’ll just leave it at that for the time being, with sincere wishes for your good health, I am your affectionate friend A.H. Koning 163 van Diemenstraat The Hague Holland Paris, 16 March 1889 My dear brother, I learn that you’re not yet better, which causes me much grief. I do so wish that you could tell me how you feel, for nothing is as distressing as uncertainty, and if you would tell me how things are going I can do something sooner 
   to give you relief. You’ve done so much for me that it breaks my heart to know that now that I’ll probably have days of happiness with my dear Jo, you will actually have very bad days. She had the illusion that, since she wants to live my life as much as possible, you would have been a brother for her as you have always been for me. We hope from the bottom of our hearts that you can return to good health and that you can soon take up your work again.
   In arranging my new apartment I see your paintings again with so much pleasure. They make the rooms so jolly, and there’s such a note of truth, of real countryside in each one. It’s just as you said sometimes of certain paintings by other artists, that they seem to come like that directly from the fields. I would certainly have come to see you if it wasn’t so far, but I’m short of time and I ask myself if my visit could be useful to you in any way. Signac
   is to go to the south soon. He’ll go and see you. At the moment I have an exhibition by Claude Monet at my place, which is proving very successful. In a little while the public will certainly want paintings by the new school, for they’re certainly exercising the public mind. If you could you would be very kind in giving me or having me given news of you, for apart from the letters from Messrs Rey and Salles4 I don’t know anything about you. I wish you better health and I remain your brother who loves you. Theo. My dear friend, After wandering along the coast, I’ve settled in Cassis. I’m sending you my address so that you can give me good news about yourself. I’ve written to your brother, he hasn’t replied to me yet. I shake your hand most cordially. Your P. Signac 2 place de la République – Cassis. Cassis – Friday My dear friend, I’m really happy to have received good news of you and to learn that you have set to work again. As I told you in my hasty card, I’ve settled in Cassis, a pretty little port an hour from Marseille. Some white, some blue, some orange harmonically dispersed in pretty undulations. All around mountains with 
   rhythmic curves. I’m giving myself a great deal of trouble. Should I manage to render a tenth of what I see, I’d be most content. Our Veronese Green and our cobalt blue – not that of that good fellow Tanguy – are without doubt shit beside these Mediterranean waves. I’m much hindered by the weather: rain or mistral for several days. I’m taking advantage of this setback to do the plates of a work that was ordered from me 
   in collaboration with Mr C. Henry (perhaps you’ve read certain of my collaborator’s articles in the Revue Indépendante) by the Librairie de l’Art. It’s a book on the aesthetics of shapes, whose measurements and angles can be studied by means of an instrument – C. Henry’s aesthetic protractor. One then sees if the shape is harmonious or not. This will have a great social bearing, above all from the point of view of industrial art. We’re teaching the art of seeing correctly and beautifully to apprentice workmen etc. whose aesthetic education has only been conducted up to now 
   by means of empirical formulae and dishonest or silly advice. I’ll send you one of these brochures when they’ve seen the light of day. Why don’t you come to do a study or two in this pretty country? Good news of you very often, eh? Cordial handshakes. P. Signac 2 place de la République Cassis. Mr and Mrs H.C. Bonger-Weissman have the honour to announce the marriage of their daughter, Miss Johanna Bonger, to Mr Theodore van Gogh.  18 April 1889. Amsterdam, Weteringschans 121  Mrs T. van Gogh-Carbentus has the honour to announce the marriage of her son, Mr Theodore van Gogh, to Miss Johanna Bonger. 18 April 1889. Breda (Netherlands) Paris, 8, cité Pigalle 24 April 1889 My dear Vincent, I was very touched by your letter, which we received yesterday, you really say too many kind things about a thing that’s just entirely natural, not taking into account that you’ve given it back to me several times over, both by your work and by a brotherly affection which is worth more than all the money I’ll ever possess. 
   It pains me to know that you’re still in a state of incomplete health. Although nothing in your letter betrays weakness of mind, on the contrary, the fact that you judge it necessary to enter an asylum is quite serious in itself. Let’s hope that this will be merely a preventive measure. As I know you well enough to believe you capable of all the sacrifices imaginable, I’ve thought that there’s a possibility that you may have thought of this solution to encumber less those who know you. If that’s the case, I beg you not to do it, for certainly life 
   in there can’t be agreeable. So be well aware of what you’re doing, and if perhaps you wouldn’t make another try first. Either by coming back here for a while, or by going to Pont-Aven during the summer, or by trying to board with people who would take care of you.  If you had no ulterior motive in writing to me as you did, I find that you’re absolutely right to go to St-Rémy. By staying there for a while you’ll be able to regain confidence in your own strength, and nothing will prevent you from returning to Arles after a little while if the heart tells you to. Mr Salles has sent me some prospectuses of St-Rémy 
  in which it’s said that a third party must request admission. I therefore enclose the letter for the director of the establishment, which you can use however you wish. As soon as you’ve decided to leave I’ll send you the necessary money. Now I also want to tell you that we’ve been here since last Saturday, we’re almost settled in, and every day the apartment takes on a more lived-in aspect, thanks to all sorts of inventions on Jo’s part. We get along very well together, so that there’s such complete satisfaction on both sides that we feel happier than I can tell you. We left Mother and the sisters in perfect 
   health. Ma seems to be getting younger. She has now gone back to Breda after an absence of almost a month. My marriage pleased her very much, above all because Jo and herself and Wil get on perfectly, moreover she has something so sincere in her ways that there are many people on whom she makes a very agreeable impression. Although there are many things of life about which she does not know and on which her opinion must be formed, she has such a fund of good will and ardour to do good that I’m no longer afraid of the disillusionments I feared before our marriage. 
   Up to now everything is going much better than I had thought, and I hadn’t dared hope for so much happiness. I didn’t have enough time in Holland to see many paintings, but I saw the Jewish bride5 once again, and the other Rembrandts, the F. Hals in Haarlem, which I found more beautiful than ever, and Rembrandt’s portrait of an old woman at the museum in Brussels. This last one is very fine. These old portraits are what’s most remarkable and most characteristic in Holland. We’re a long way from that age, when we see the people of today. At C.M.’s there was an exhibition of charcoal croquis by Mauve, leaves from his sketchbooks. Very touching things. Jet made us a present of one of those drawings, with which I’m very, very pleased. Write to me soon about what you’ve definitely decided and don’t despair, for better days will certainly still come for you. I shake both your hands. Theo  Paris, 2 May 1889 My dear Vincent, Many thanks for your letter, which shows us that at least your physical powers leave nothing to be desired, since you say that you have too much of them; however you must be wary, when one feels one’s powers it isn’t proven that one has a great deal of them, but if that’s the case, so much the better. Now there’s something in your letter of which I disapprove entirely and which I’m going to tell you, afterwards you can do what 
   you want. It is your plans for the Foreign Legion. That’s a last resort, isn’t it? for I don’t think that you have spontaneously acquired a taste for this profession. It’s that not being able to do any painting at the moment, being in convalescence, gives you the idea of no longer being able to do it at all, then you tell yourself that three months’ care without being able to work cost money and don’t bring any in, but you’re forgetting that, supposing they let you work when you’re a soldier, you’re held there like a kid in a boarding school, and if you already fear the supervision of a house like the one at St-Rémy you have much more to fear from the practices of military life. All in all, this idea comes from an excessive fear of causing me expenses and problems, and you get yourself worked up needlessly. The last year hasn’t been bad for me from the point of view 
   of money, and you can therefore, without scruples and without harming me, count on what I was sending you before. If you’re not averse to going to St-Rémy for let’s say a month, you would have been examined by specialist doctors and probably you would have been able to benefit from their advice. On the other hand, in a letter written to me by the Director of the St-Rémy establishment, he doesn’t want to promise anything on the subject of allowing you to go out when you wish before having examined you, but I assume that after seeing you there’s no doubt that he’ll leave you free to go out to go and work. For myself, I attribute a large part of your illness to the fact that your material existence has been neglected too much. In an establishment as at St-Rémy there’s more or less the same regularity in mealtimes etc., and I think that this regularity will do you no harm, 
   on the contrary. Now if you prefer, we could obtain information about the institution at Aix or Marseille to see if other conditions are laid down there. You should know that from one point of view you aren’t to be pitied, although it may appear otherwise. How many are there who would want to have done the work that you’ve delivered, what more do you ask for, wasn’t that your desire, to have created something, if it has been given to you to do what you’ve done, why would you despair whether a time will come when you’ll do good work again? However bad society may be at present, there’s the means to live in it, the proof Puvis de C., Degas and others. I’m sure that if you want you can take up your work again in a short while from now. However, do not believe that I don’t feel all the disillusionment when you went back into your studio, for example, after the damp made it go mouldy. Continue to be of good heart, your disasters will surely come to an end. Best wishes from my wife, who is well. She’s becoming really accustomed to the house. Good handshake. Theo Sunday evening, 5 May 1889 Having to go away tomorrow and being busy on Tuesdays, I place myself at your disposal to accompany you to St-Rémy on Wednesday. We would leave by the 8. train, if that suits you. Having already seen Mr Peyron, it is appropriate that I should accompany you myself. Yours truly, Salles My dear Vincent, A few words in haste to thank you for your last letter and to tell you that I don’t consider your going to St-Rémy as a retreat, as you say, but simply as a momentary rest so as to come back soon with new strength. I remember seeing something that struck me greatly a long time ago. In rue des Petits-Carreaux2 I saw a very heavy dray which had to climb that street. The driver struck his four horses harder and harder, but right in the middle the worn-out horses refused to go a step further. So he made them turn round and, when they were back at the bottom of the street, almost without resting them, he turned round 
   again and arrived at the top of the street without difficulty. I’d very much like you to tell me how you’re treated in the establishment and what the food is like etc. Mr Salles said many good things about what he had seen. He has been perfect, he wrote me a long letter to give me an account of his visit. As I only know from your telegram that you have gone, I don’t know if he accompanied you as he proposed to do. In the Salon there’s a very fine painting by Raffaëlli, two absinthe drinkers. I find him strongest when he paints these people who have come down in the world, although the portrait of two young girls in white may perhaps be the best portrait in the Salon. Zorn has female bathers at the seaside, somewhat in the genre of In Arcady by Harrison, which you remember perhaps. There’s a Birth of Christ by Uhde, triptych, in which there’s a pretty sentiment. There’s very little of interest in all of this penny bazaar. I’m entirely of your opinion that one mustn’t believe solely in Impressionism, but still there must be that individual aspect which is lacking in almost everything there is in the Salon. More soon and look after yourself. Good handshake. Theo Paris 8 May ’89 Dearest brother, It’s high time that your new little sister came to chat with you and didn’t always just let Theo convey her regards. When we weren’t married yet I always thought: Well, I don’t really dare to write to Vincent about everything yet, but now we really have become brother and sister, and I would so much like you to know me a little and, if possible, love me a little. For my part — it’s been the case for a long time — I’ve heard so much about you, both from Wil and from Theo — and here in the house there are masses of things that are reminders of you, 
   when I find a nice little jug or a vase or something, then it’s always: Vincent bought that or V. liked that so much1 — scarcely a day passes when we don’t speak of you. I still keep talking about ‘our house’ and just can’t get used to saying ‘the apartment’;2 I wish you could see how nice and cosy Theo had already arranged everything before I came. The bedroom, in particular, is so sweet, very light and lots of pink in it — and in bed in the morning I look straight at that beautiful flowering peach tree of yours, which looks at me in such a friendly way every morning. There’s also one of your paintings hanging above the piano 
   in our drawing room (we got one from Aunt Cornelie) — a large one which I like very much — it’s a landscape near Arles. The dining room is full too, but Theo’s not happy with the arrangement yet, and every Sunday morning is spent rehanging and arranging everything. It’s so wonderful when Theo’s home for the whole day on Sundays — I remember that I always loved Sundays so much as a child because they were so very cosy and pleasant at home — (something that most people couldn’t understand) but now even more. 
       So Monday it was a double treat for me when all the businesses were closed for the opening of the exhibition6 — naturally we did not go to the exhibition but amused ourselves in our own way. Paris did look lovely that day — I do so hope that I’ll grow to love it as Theo does — but sometimes I’m afraid that it won’t be the case — it’s so busy and chaotic, and I love quiet so much! So I’m very glad that we live in our quiet quarter — it’s not an aristocratic one but a real, typical neighbourhood — a large artist’s studio over the road 
   and right in front of the house a couple of very tiny little gardens — in each an arbour and a couple of lilacs, which are presently flowering beautifully. What a lot of beautiful flowers there are in Paris — if I had to name something good about P., that would be one of the first things! A great many of Theo’s acquaintances have already come to see us in the evenings — yesterday evening, for instance, was a whole reunion — Pissarro and his son, Isaäcson and young Nibbrig8 (but I don’t know whether you know him) and my brother — who’s been coming to eat with us for some time now because his wife’s gone to Holland. I just wish 
   that I spoke rather better French — I can manage on my own, doing the shopping and with the charwoman, but carrying on a conversation, and particularly when Theo’s there — I find that awful. I haven’t dared try to write a letter in French either — even though I actually knew that you’d prefer it, but Wil told me that she always just wrote in Dutch. As soon as I feel a bit of a Parisienne, I’ll start writing in French — is that all right? Lies and Wil have a little plan to come here together this summer, 
   how I’d like that, particularly having Wil here for a time — how she’d laugh at me — for she’s such a clever little housekeeper herself. She can do everything — and I — I’ll confess honestly — I can’t do anything — I’ve already burnt the rice twice and the plums once — that poor Theo, he just has to swallow everything! Apart from that we get along very well together — we’ve already been married three weeks today — it seems to me a long and short time ago — and nothing, nothing is strange to us any more — just as if we’ve always been together. The worst thing though is 
   that I don’t yet look anything like a married lady — yesterday I went to pay our baker and the man simply wouldn’t understand that I was Madame van Gogh and kept calling me Mademoiselle, it’s really too bad! I must see about lunch because Theo will be home in a few minutes — so I’ll say goodbye to you for today — I hope that I haven’t bored you too much — but of late I’ve got so used to writing to both Breda and Amsterdam about all those little things that they so like to know10 that I can’t write a serious letter any more — it will get better again later. With warm regards, and wishing you all the best, your loving little sister Jo Marseille 13 May 1889 Mr Vincent, If I have delayed in writing to you, I thought I could use my day off to go and see you; as I was not able to come to Arles, I come to ask you for news of your health, are you well recovered since our last conversation? You seemed to me disposed to begin your work in earnest again, the countryside is beautiful, you cannot lack for models. You would give me great pleasure if you did me the honour of a reply. Have you received news of your esteemed brother? As for me, my health is very good. I received a letter from my wife telling me that she is very well, as are Marcelle, Armand and Camille. They join me in sending you their respects, and hope 
   that my letter finds you in good health. If you have the occasion to see Mr and Mrs Ginoux and the friends Mr and Mrs Bressy, Pelissier4 and all the friends who are interested in me, give them my best regards, or tell Mr Ginoux to do it for you. My dear Mr Vincent, accept the regards of he who declares himself to be your entirely devoted friend Roulin, Railway Postman5 57, rue Breteuil, 57. c/o Mrs Delpal6 Marseille (Bouches du Rhône)  Paris, 21 May 1889 My dear Vincent, Thank you very much for your letter, Jo was also very pleased with the one you wrote to her. We were pleased to learn that your journey to St-Rémy went well, and that you feel calmer there than in Arles. All the same, I hope that your stay will only be for a short length of time, for having these mad people as your neighbours can’t be agreeable. What I would like is that we could discover some people 
   somewhere who would take care of you while allowing you your entire freedom. That must be possible to find. If you didn’t fear returning to Paris or its surroundings, I would try to find somewhere like that for you to board. Tell us in your next letter what the establishment you’re now in is like. How are you treated, is the food sufficient, and how are the people with whom you have to deal? Do you see something of the country? Above all, don’t wear yourself out, for it’s better that at present you do all you can to regain your strength. The work will come afterwards. A few days ago I received your consignment, which is very important, there are some superb things in it. Everything arrived in good order and undamaged. The Berceuse, the portrait of Roulin, the little sower, with the tree, the baby, the starry night, the sunflowers7 and the chair with the pipe and the tobacco8 are the ones I like best up to now. 
   The first two, in particular, are most curious. Certainly it’s not the beautiful that is taught there, but there’s something in them that’s so striking and so close to the truth. Who tells us that we’re more right than the simple people who buy images in loud colours? Or rather, isn’t the charm they see in them as much a sensation evoked as when pretentious people look at the paintings in museums? Now in your canvases there’s a vigour which one certainly doesn’t find in chromos, in time that will become very fine as impasto, and certainly they’ll be appreciated one day. If we see that Pissarros, Gauguins, Renoirs, Guillaumins don’t sell, one must be almost pleased not to have the public’s favour, since those who have it now won’t always have it, and the times could 
   well change very soon. If you saw how weak the Salon and the World Exhibition are from the point of view of the paintings, you would, I think, be of the opinion that they won’t hold out for much longer. The Dutch school is doing very well there. There are two watercolours by J. H. Weissenbruch10 which I like most particularly, also some W. and J. Maris11 and Bosboom, Israëls13 and Breitner. One of the Weissenbruchs is a windmill beside a canal, blue sky with a little cloud which hides the sun. The other is a canal with boats one moonlit evening. He’s a forceful artist, that one, but Tersteeg says that he isn’t saleable. Lately I saw Gauguin, who is currently working on some sculpture. He wants to leave shortly for Pont-Aven, where De Haan is already. It appears that soon there will be an exhibition of the Independents, I would very much like to know what you think of that, and which canvases you think are the best to be exhibited. I’ve heard tell that everyone can exhibit 4 canvases, since there’s no room to admit any more. More soon, and write to us also when you feel like it. Good handshake and ever yours, Theo Warm regards from Jo. Marseille, 22 May 1889 My dear Mr Vincent, I have just returned from Lambesc to see the family. I hasten to tell you that I found them all in good health. My wife is very well, Armand, our blacksmith, I have realized by myself that he has been striking the iron hard, his bosses are very pleased with him. Camille had his first communion last Sunday, and I gave them the pleasant surprise of arriving on Monday evening at 6 o’clock. Beautiful Marcelle is still doing well, she has two teeth, she is an extraordinary little one, very well-behaved, she has everything in her favour, only when I arrived she didn’t want to see me. It was only when I left that she really looked at me and pulled my beard a little. I am very satisfied with my journey, one must hope that we shall all be reunited in Marseille at Michaelmas, for I have rented an apartment for that period. I arrived Tuesday evening at midnight in Marseille. When I got up this morning, Wednesday, my landlady3 handed me your letter, which satisfied me to learn that you had left Arles 
   to go to St-Rémy of your own accord. Continue your paintings, you are in a beautiful part of the world, the countryside is very beautiful, the soil is very well worked, you will find a great change in the farming down there, you will not find gardens that look like cemeteries, as in Arles. Continue to take good care of yourself, follow properly the good advice which will be given to you by the good Doctor who is attached to the establishment. I have great confidence that your health will be completely restored, with the good will that you have you will succeed in doing very fine paintings, you live in the garden of the Bouches du Rhône, you will not lack for models made by nature, continue and be of good heart. We talked at length about you with my wife on the subject of my last journey to Arles. When I write to her that I have received one of your letters that will give her great pleasure. This very day I am going to tell her about it. Please, Mr Vincent, accept my regards as well as those of my family, and a caress from Marcelle who, thanks to you, can say hello to my Portrait evening and morning, for they are hanging in the alcove where she sleeps, she rests in peace under the benevolent gaze of both the wife and the Father. I shake both your hands affectionately. Your entirely devoted Roulin. Railway postman rue Breteuil No. 57 Marseille My regards to your esteemed brother when you write to him. Arles, 31 May 1889. Dear Mr Vincent, We were very pleased to learn that you are doing well and that the air of St-Rémy has done you good. We understand that you are feeling well, and that the surroundings of your new residence, which is only temporary, will distract you and provide subjects for your art. I have had a fine frame made as we had agreed, in walnut and impeccable. I delivered it to the bursar. I have told everyone who knows you how you are, and everyone was glad to learn that you are in good health, and we hope to have the pleasure of seeing you soon, in anticipation of which Mrs Ginoux and I send you our best regards. Joseph Ginoux.  16 June 1889 My dear Vincent, I should have written to you a long, long time ago but I couldn’t put my thoughts into words. There are moments which one feels well, but when it’s so difficult to take account of what has taken shape in thought and what is still in a vague state. So I’m not sure of being able to write to you as I wanted today, but my letter will leave all the same, if only to tell you that we often think of you 
   and that your latest paintings have given me a great deal to think about as regards your state of mind when you made them. All of them have a power of colour which you hadn’t attained before, which in itself is a rare quality, but you have gone further, and if there are people who occupy themselves seeking the symbol by dint of torturing the form, I find it in many of your canvases through the expression of the summary of your thoughts on nature and living beings, which you feel are so strongly attached to it. But how hard your mind must have worked and how you endangered yourself to the extreme point where vertigo is inevitable. With regard to that, my dear brother, when you tell me that you’re working again, which gladdens me on the one hand, because in it you find a means of avoiding the state into which many of the unfortunates fall who are cared for in the establishment where you are, I think of it 
         with a little anxiety, for before your complete recovery you mustn’t put yourself at risk in these mysterious regions, which it appears one can touch lightly but not enter with impunity. Don’t give yourself more trouble than is necessary, for if you give only a simple account of what you see, there are sufficient good qualities for your canvases to last. Think of the still lifes and of the flowers Delacroix did when he went to the country to stay with G. Sand. It’s true that afterwards he had a reaction by doing the Education of the Virgin, and that’s not to say that in doing as I tell you you won’t make a masterpiece afterwards. But direct your works in such a way that they don’t over-exert you. As you know, there’s an exhibition in a café at the exhibition where Gauguin and a few others (Schuffenecker) are exhibiting. At first I’d said that you would exhibit there too, but they acted like such rowdies there that it became really 
   bad to be part of it. However, Schuff. claims that this display will eclipse all the other painters, and if one had let him have his way I think he would have walked through Paris with the flags of all colours to show that he was the great conqueror. It was a bit like going to the World Exhibition by the back stairs. As always there were exclusions. As Lautrec had exhibited at a circle he wasn’t allowed to be in it, etc. The other day a Rembrandt sketch was sold in a public sale, I would like you to have seen it, it was the figure of the Angel Gabriel standing, which is in the sky of his etching of the annunciation to the shepherds. What a marvel! The colour had remained quite bright; perhaps originally it was all yellow. The shadows were much more coloured than he usually does them, and were probably very pronounced blue, green and violet, but of an exquisite unity and harmony. Those who hold up the best at the big exhibition are Corot, Manet, Delacroix, Millet, Ricard, and above all Daumier. Some Degas were put in it, but he had them taken out. Gauguin left for Pont-Aven a fortnight ago, so he hasn’t seen your paintings. Isaäcson likes your latest consignment very much. I’ll send the Bedroom back to you, but you shouldn’t retouch this canvas, it can be repaired. Copy it and send that one back so that I can have it lined. The red vineyard is very beautiful, I’ve hung it in one of our rooms. I also very much like the vertical figure of a woman, there was a fellow here named Polack who knows Spain and the paintings there well. He said that it was as beautiful as one of the great Spaniards. Good health and good handshake from Jo and from Theo Paris 5 July. My dear brother, This time I’ll try to write to you in French, first I know that you like it more, and then with both of us expressing ourselves in the same language we’ll eventually understand each other better, I believe. Only I’m not at all accustomed to writing in French, and I fear I may make mistakes which will seem very ridiculous to you – but I’m going to do my best. I very much hope that in a while I’ll be able to express myself better – if now the foreigners I meet don’t speak English, the conversation isn’t at all animated, I can assure you. I’m going to begin by telling you a great piece of news which 
   has greatly occupied us lately – it is that this winter, around February probably, we’re hoping to have a baby, a pretty little boy – whom we’ll call Vincent if you’ll consent to be his godfather. I’m well aware that we ought not to count on it too much, and that it could also be a little girl, but Theo and I always imagine it as a boy. When we wrote to Amsterdam and Breda2 everyone replied ‘aren’t you pleased, what joy’, etc. etc. – and yet to tell the truth, when I found out I wasn’t at all pleased, on the contrary I was very unhappy, and Theo had a great deal of 
   difficulty consoling me. It isn’t that I don’t like babies – my little brother who is now twelve, I had him in my arms when he was scarcely two hours old, I adored him and I think there’s nothing prettier in the world than a little child – but that’s a slightly selfish pleasure. When I think that neither Theo nor I are in very good health, I’m very afraid that we may make a weak child, and for me the greatest treasure that parents can give their child is a good constitution. But the doctor reassured me greatly on that score, and then good food and good care can do a great deal – and it won’t 
   lack for those. Do you remember the portrait of the Roulin baby you sent Theo? Everyone admires it greatly, and many times now people have asked ‘but why have you put this portrait in this out-of-the-way corner?’ It’s because – from my place at table I can just see the child’s big blue eyes, its pretty little hands and round cheeks, and I like to imagine that ours will be as strong, as healthy and as beautiful as that one – and because his uncle will consent to do his portrait one day! In one of your recent letters you asked Theo if he was still dining at the restaurant? Not at all – never – what’s the good of being married if one couldn’t even dine at home? He always comes 
   for lunch at midday and comes home at seven-thirty for dinner. Often in the evening someone comes. Isaäcson or Nibbrig – Mr Tersteeg has dined with us twice, De Haan has also come to see us6 – and when he was there Mr Pissarro and his son7 came too. Generally we’re very tired in the evening and we go to bed early – however I find that Theo is looking not at all well, but he has been caused a great deal of fatigue by that Secrétan sale, and then the heat is so unbearable! Don’t talk to me about Paris in this weather, and Theo says that it’s even worse in August! I read with great pleasure what you wrote to Theo about reading 
  Shakespeare. Isn’t it beautiful – and so few people know it, ‘It’s too difficult,’ people say – but that isn’t true – as for me I understand it much better than Zola. But when I think that it’s almost 300 years since these so beautiful things were written I think that the world hasn’t progressed much in these times. When I was in London I once saw The merchant of Venice at the theatre11 – and then the effect that it produced was considerably greater than by only reading it. I’ve also seen Hamlet and Macbeth, but in Dutch. Then it loses a good deal. Now I’m going to bid you good-day. If you would like, write and tell us your opinion about our little boy, for a boy it must be. Your sister Jo Arles, 16 July 1889. Sir, I have made enquiries in Paris about the book you ordered from me1 and they replied that it was out of print. If you want another volume, please give me the title, and I shall send it to you forthwith; if not, I shall return your money on your next visit to me. Yours faithfully, H. Lamblot  successor to A. Jauffret. 16 July 1889. My dear Vincent, I was absolutely incapable of writing to you earlier, the heat was overwhelming, and I felt so weak that everything tired me out extremely. Now I’m more or less recovered, for good I hope. I thank you very much for your letters and for the beautiful drawings you sent. The Hospital at Arles2 is very remarkable, the Butterfly3 and 
   the Eglantine branches4 are really beautiful too: simple in terms of colour and really beautifully drawn. The latest drawings look like they’ve been done in a fury and are a little more distanced from nature. When I see one of these subjects in a painting I’ll understand them more. I’ve had several people to see your paintings. The Pissarros, père Tanguy, Werenskiold, a Norwegian who has a lot of talent and who got the medal of honour in his country’s section at the World Exhibition, and Maus. The latter is the secretary of the Vingt in Brussels. He came to ask if you would exhibit at their next exhibition. There’s still time, but he didn’t know if he’d be coming to Paris beforehand. I told him that I thought you 
   wouldn’t have anything against it. He’ll probably invite Bernard as well. People generally like the Night effect9 and the Sunflowers. I’ve put one of the Sunflowers on the mantelpiece in our dining room. It has the effect of a piece of fabric embroidered with satin and gold, it’s magnificent. As from the 15th of this month I no longer have the rue Lepic apartment, and as it was absolutely impossible to store all the canvases at our place, I’ve rented a small room in père Tanguy’s house where I’ve put quite a few of them. I’ve made a choice of those which are to be taken off the stretching frames and then we’ll put others on them. Père Tanguy has already given me a lot of help, and it’s going to be very easy to let him continually have new things to show. You can imagine how enthusiastic he is about coloured things like the Vineyards, the Night effect, etc. I’d very much like you to be able to hear him sometime. I also forgot to say that De Haan has been here, he sent Jo a monster bouquet of poppies of all colours, never 
   had I seen such a beautiful bouquet, and the rain of multicoloured leaves when they were beginning to drop their petals. He very much likes what you’re doing. He’s now with Gauguin. Isaäcson is all at sea now that De Haan is no longer there. I don’t know what he ought to do, but what he’s painting is poor! He talks about art better than he does it. Gauguin is writing in a newspaper, which I’m sending you. He wrote to me last week and asked me to give him your address, which he’d lost. De Haan was saying that Gauguin has done some very fine things. You were unlucky when you went to Arles not to find Mr Salles, or Rey either. I’ve had a letter from the former. He’s at a little seaside place. Before receiving your letter in which you say to send him the Pilgrims at Emmaus18 I’d sent him the Angelus, lithograph by Vernier. I regret not having thought of the other subject, for it would have been rather more to his taste.  You can imagine how the news that Jo is pregnant excited her parents. Her father and mother are going to come here next week. Ma is also very pleased. It’s very true what you 
   say, that her letter’s remarkable for her age. Yes, certainly it’s good that I’ve got married, for if it hadn’t been done I think I would be really ill now, while I think that now I’m going to regain strength and that I’ll be able to work a little better than I have done. Jo is really good to me, and yet she’s had some really bad days with vomiting etc., now it seems to be calming down and she looks well. If only the child is viable. I think that children generally inherit 
   their parents’ kind of constitution rather than the latter’s state of health at the moment when they made it. Andries Bonger would very much like to have a child, but it doesn’t come. His wife has a very difficult nature, and they have a lot of trouble getting by on the money he earns. Their household is far from cheerful. Yet his wife isn’t just anybody, but they can’t manage to see eye to eye. We don’t see them often, as they live very far from our place. I’ll finish my letter in haste. Enclosed is a postal order, for as you didn’t find Mr Salles you may need something. Warm regards, from Jo as well, and thank you very much again for your kind letters and the drawings. Yours, Theo  29 July 1889 My dear Vincent, I’m a little worried that you haven’t received my letter, which contained a postal order for 10 francs. You usually write immediately you receive it, otherwise I’d say that you haven’t had the time. I reproach myself for writing to you so seldom, but writing letters has been extremely difficult for me of late, I don’t know why. I received your 
   last consignment in perfect condition, and find it extremely beautiful. Are these things which you had put aside expressly to let them dry, for in most of these canvases I find more clarity of expression and such a beautiful ensemble. The Undergrowth with the trees surrounded with ivy, the Lane in Arles3 and the Fields with the gardens in springtime4 are really beautiful, these, and some others too, are now mounted on stretching frames from which we removed those that were on them and are currently at Tanguy’s. They make a fine display in the frame. Tanguy himself likes them very much too. I think you 
   choose fine subjects for paintings, those tufted trees full of freshness and bathed in the light of the sun are marvellously beautiful. If you were living in surroundings entirely to your taste and you were surrounded by people you liked and who returned your friendship, I would be very pleased, for you cannot work better than you are doing. And what a quantity of fine things you’ve produced. It’s fortunate that your health is good. Mr Peyron wrote to me recently that he found your condition very satisfactory.
   Let’s hope that it’ll go from strength to strength. Jo’s parents are here at the moment, her mother with us and her father at André’s. It’s a good distraction, especially for Jo, and it forces her to move about, which appears to be necessary. She’s looking well and is merely a little weak. As for me, I look like a corpse, but I’ve been to see Rivet, who gave me all kinds of drugs, which are good, though, in that they’ve stopped that cough that was killing me. I think it has gone now. It’s the change of life, and with the way I’m looked after now I’ll regain strength, once the illness is over. Yesterday we all went to St-Germain. Oh, how beautiful the countryside is! Why do people go and wear themselves out in towns when they could breathe some of that good air that gives back life? Do you now leave the building sometimes? Write to me when you can – tell me something of how things are going, don’t work too hard. Good handshake, from Jo as well. Yours, Theo Thank you a thousand times for the beautiful consignment. Paris 4 August 1889. Dear Vincent, I found it so strange to have received no letter from you that I telegraphed to find out if you were well. Dr Peyron answered me in a letter that you’ve been ill for a few days but that it’s already a little better. My poor fellow, how I wish I knew what to do to get these nightmares to stop. When your letter didn’t come I imagined, I don’t know why, that you were on your way here and would come and surprise us. Should you ever think that it might do you good to 
   be among people who would like to do their best to cheer you up a little, and who would like to have you with them, then think of our little room. It was inaugurated not long ago by Jo’s mother, so it’s proved usable. I hope that this indisposition was nothing but an after-effect of the previous crisis, but if there was anything particular to which you ascribe this recurrence, at any rate tell me. Are the doctor and the other staff good to you? Is a distinction made between the various patients, and does this depend on what they pay? When one’s concerned one imagines things to be different and worse than they are, so write to me 
   as soon as you can, and even if it’s only a few words. I’m not getting more concerned than necessary, but all the same I hope you’ll tell me everything. We are well; I feel much better than a while ago and am not coughing at all any more because of Rivet’s medicine. In your last letter you wrote that we are brothers for more than one reason. I feel that too, and even if my heart isn’t as sensitive as yours, I can sometimes imagine the distress that you feel because of so many thoughts that aren’t resolved. Don’t lose heart, and remember that I need you so much. Jo sends her best wishes for your recovery. I hope that you’ll soon be able to send good reports. Yours, Theo Paris 16 August Dear Vincent, We received your letter for Cor and gave it to him this morning because he arrived here very early, at 6 o’clock. We’re so pleased that he was able to break his journey to Southampton in Paris — in all likelihood he’ll be away for a long time, and Theo, in particular, would have been very sorry if he hadn’t seen him again. We started 
   showing him the city straightaway this morning, from place de l’Etoile to place de la Bastille, and he was thrilled with it. Theo was a bit disappointed that there wasn’t a note for him in it — do write to him soon — even if it’s just one little word — we’re so longing to hear how you are from you yourself, and hope so sincerely that you’ll soon feel better again. You don’t know how often 
   you are thought about and spoken of. Ma wrote, too, that she was longing for another letter from you — do you know what Cor brought me from her this morning? — a pair of the sweetest little socks for our little boy (for I still insist that it will be a little boy — even if you mock me for it!). Do let Theo hear something from you soon if you can — he so longs for it. A warm handshake in thought from Your loving Jo Happily, Theo is well again. Marseille, 19 August 1889 Sir and dear friend Vincent. I received your letter with great pleasure, especially to learn that you are in good health. Continue to take good care of yourself, follow the advice of your good Doctor and you will see your complete recovery to the satisfaction of your relatives and your friends. I am very pleased that your brother is very happy with married life, he appears to be such a good man that if he has taken a wife like himself, they must be happy. Offer him my friendly greetings as well as those of my family when 
   you write to him. We are very charmed by the welcome he gave to our Portraits, as much for the friendship he shows towards myself and my family as for the praise he gives to your work. Receive our sincere congratulations. In your letter you think that I am with my family, unfortunately not, I still have another month and a half to go, I have only rented my apartment for Michaelmas, my family cannot come until the first ten days of October. Augustine and Marcelle came to stay for a fortnight in Marseille, because I could not go and see them. Augustine and Marcelle are well. Marcelle is ever 
   more beautiful, she is walking all on her own, she talks like a little Parrot. I can tell you that I spent a pleasant fortnight with them. A little one who isn’t unsociable, who gets on with everyone. If you had seen her admiring paintings, as soon as she saw a painting in houses, in the street, she talked to it. I will not have your paintings, our portraits, until I have the family. Do not fear that I will have anything done to your paintings for I respect the artist’s talent too much, and once my word is given you know it is sacred to me. Let us hope that one day we can see each other again and once again cement our friendship. When the family is in Marseille I hope that 
   you will honour us with a visit one day. I was very pleased with the approaches friend Gauguin made to your brother to get you to participate in their exhibition, it is very good of him. I congratulate you on your resolutions not to want to exhibit anything without your being in Paris. Between now and then you will be able to have an exhibition all of your own by adding everything to it that you do at St-Rémy. Do not be discouraged, work in those beautiful fields, take advantage of the models that nature provides you, with work health will return. Dear Mr Vincent, accept my sincere regards as well as those of my wife and my children. Marcelle sends you a big kiss. I shake both your hands. Your entirely devoted Roulin Railway Postman No. 57 rue Breteuil When you have the time to honour me with a letter you will always give me great pleasure.  Paris, 5 Sept 1889 My dear Vincent, You gave me really great pleasure by writing to me, when one doesn’t know one thinks that things are even worse than they really are. It’s bad enough that you’ve had a crisis, but fortunately I see from your letter that now you’re better. The view from your window, of which you give a croquis, must be really beautiful; in Paris one sometimes yearns to see the real countryside as you draw a fragment of it. One never sees peasants in the surroundings of Paris, and truly I no longer know when 
   the wheat or potatoes are harvested. It’s true that in town one meets people who are certainly interesting too, but one sometimes has enough of it, and then when one can’t go away a painting of the real countryside does one good, and in those moments, certainly, a Bodmer will give as much or more pleasure as some painting that is technically clever but which doesn’t have that something true and healthy like a slice of black bread. Rousseau also has this knowledgeable side. There are paintings of his at the Exhibition with areas of forest in which one can recognize all the species of tree with real heather and real ferns at their feet. Certainly, if these people aren’t artists, and one must be darned fussy not to take them as such, they’re in any case men, and of the sort one would like the world to be full of. 
   There’s old père Pissarro, who has all the same done some really fine things lately, and it’s precisely there that one also finds these qualities of rusticity which show immediately that the man is more at his ease in a pair of clogs than in polished boots. He recently lost his mother, who was very old but it hit him hard all the same;4 he also had to have an operation on one eye, but I don’t think it has cured him. He still wears a sort of muzzle which really annoys him. He has quite a lot of difficulty selling6 and has a lot of trouble, but always courageous. One of his sons is in London, it appears that there are schools there where one learns decoration and where the pupils are absolutely free to grasp the subject as they understand it. The first thing he was given to do was a frieze of brambles. It would be really good if the same thing was done here, leaving people to follow their own inclinations, they’ll find ornaments taken from 
   nature, and many changes for interior decoration etc. might follow from it. It’s a pity that the Impressionists aren’t known in England, there must be people there who would like them. This week Tersteeg sent me eight watercolours by J.H. Weissenbruch, who isn’t dead, by the way, they’re really really fine. Even if he isn’t attached to the detail of the vegetation, he knows the nature of the Dutch countryside as Daumier knew his lawyers, the stunted trees, the muddy roads through the meadows, and his skies, aren’t they really like one sees them in Holland! I’m very pleased that Tersteeg had the courage to buy some from him, he’s always the same, he begins by saying no and after a while he returns to it and often changes his mind. Here, where Jongkind was understood, people may well understand him too. In any event, it can be tried. Gauguin has sent me a few new canvases. He says that he hesitated to send them, as what he seeks isn’t in them as he wanted it.
   He says that he found it in other canvases that aren’t dry yet. Anyway, it’s a fact that his consignment didn’t appear as fine to me as the one from last year, but there’s one canvas that’s once again a really fine Gauguin. He calls it Beautiful Angèle. It’s a portrait arranged on the canvas like the big heads in Japanese prints, there’s the bust portrait with its frame, and then the background. It’s a Breton woman seated, hands folded, black dress, lilac apron and white collar, the frame is grey and the background a beautiful lilac blue with pink and red flowers. The expression of the head and the posture are very well found. The woman looks a little like a young cow, but there’s something so fresh and once again so countrified, that it’s most agreeable to see. Now I must also tell you that the Independents’ exhibition is open and that in it there are your two paintings, ‘The irises’ and the Starry night. The latter is badly placed, for one can’t position oneself 
   far enough away, as the room is very narrow, but the other one looks extremely well. They’ve placed it on the narrow side of the room and it strikes you from a long way off. It’s a fine study, full of air and life. There are some Lautrecs which look very well, among them a Ball at the Moulin de la Galette which is very good. One could send only two paintings each because the exhibition is being held in premises much smaller than where it was up to now. Seurat has some seasides, Signac two landscapes. There’s also a painting by Hayet, that friend of Lucien Pissarro: place de la Concorde in the evening with carriages, the gaslights etc. It’s a little like that painting of the tumblers by Seurat, but more harmonious. We’re very well, I’m hardly coughing any more and I feel sturdier. Jo is well too, one begins to see that she’s pregnant, but it doesn’t inconvenience her yet. One of her sisters is with us at the moment. Mother has had a letter from Cor, he’s already far away and was well. Write me a few words if you wish, thank you once again for your letter. Be of good heart, and good handshake, from Jo as well. Ever yours, Theo Paris 18 Sept. 1889 My dear Vincent, I put off replying to your last letter as I was hoping to meet père Pissarro. He’s gone back home1 but is to return to Paris soon. While talking about you, père Tanguy and I had already touched on the question of whether there couldn’t be some way of making the arrangement of which you speak, and then his mother died, and it wasn’t 
   the moment. Last year De Haan wanted to go and stay with him, and then he said that he didn’t have room and he asked around among the neighbours, but without result. I’ve spoken of it to Jouve, who has promised to see if he couldn’t arrange something, since staying at his place is impossible because of a lack of space. But he has his studio. He looks as if he’s on the way up, he’s found decorative work. He’s a man with a lot of common sense. But as regards what is vital, knowing if your health will improve when you’re staying with one or other of these people, that’s the big question. When you 
   speak of overcoming your illness through work, old chap you’ve never done anything else, and so you have no need to move for that. On the contrary, I think that the only thing that can cure you is that you don’t try to do anything more than fortify your body, and the dark thoughts will go away when you have a bit more blood in your body. I’m afraid when you work furiously like that, for you’re bound to wear yourself out. I understand that idleness weighs heavily on you, especially when you have no company to your taste. But in coming here it’s the danger of company that annoys you. I’d say, go to the country, to a corner where there’s some forgotten artist, but 
   you know how difficult you find it to bear the cold, and as long as you’re not completely better you must also not be alone. According to Rivet, and also from what I have understood of Mr Peyron’s letters, it’s possible that you won’t have a crisis, but it’s absolutely essential that you do nothing imprudent and that you’re under the supervision of a doctor. Do you want to come to an asylum here until the winter is over, and afterwards do you want to go to the country to paint? Give me a categorical answer to this. Why do you stay shut away, and why don’t you go out and get some fresh air, it can only do you good, whereas a sedentary life is no good for you, you must also eat meat. You’ll probably have received the colours from Tasset’s, as for the second consignment of white, 
   it will reach you in a very short time, for he didn’t have any in the shop. In the exhibition there are three paintings by Meunier which you would have enjoyed seeing. One is a study of red roofs above which rise factory chimneys, which all have their heavy plumes of smoke standing out against a milky morning sky. No. 2 is a group of workmen walking two by two on their way to the factory across heaps of slag and coal, props, black pieces threaten the sky. No. 3, Female coal-pit drawer. She’s chatting with a young lad before going underground. They’re 
   dressed the same, but she’s definitely feminine, above their heads a big beam cuts out part of the sky against which they stand out. Even if the latter is neither Impressionistic nor the painting of the day, it’s beautiful all the same, all three paintings have been hoisted high up in the room. There’s also a life-size puddler in bronze, which resembles a figure by Millet, also very beautiful. Jo is well, she’s almost halfway through her pregnancy. Up to now it’s going well, she is big, which hinders her a little, but apart from occasional spells of nausea it’s going well. She isn’t anxious any more, and isn’t afraid. I hope that you’re better and that you don’t feel too unhappy. We often speak about and think of you. Warm regards from Jo and good handshake, and Ever yours, Theo 4 October 1889 My dear Vincent, I’ve delayed too long in writing to you to tell you that your last consignment arrived in good order. I very much like the wheatfield and the mountains, which are drawn with great expression. There is in the wheatfield that unshakeable side that nature has, even in its wildest 
   aspects. The orchard is very beautiful too. Isaäcson, who has lately been writing in a Dutch newspaper, would like to write about your works. He’s asked me if he may have certain things at his home, among others the mountains and the wheatfield. When I send you the reproductions of Millet3 I’ll enclose Isaäcson’s articles, I don’t like his researches into new words, but basically he talks of good things, which the majority of art critics do not. Your letter gives me much pleasure, and I thank you very much for it. I can certainly feel that being surrounded by the nuns in moments of 
   great agitation must not have a calming effect on you. Dr Peyron came to see me, and he seems well disposed towards you. I like his physiognomy very much. Here’s what he told me. He doesn’t consider you mad at all, and says that the crises you have are of an epileptic nature. For the moment he says that you’re absolutely healthy, and if it weren’t such a short time since you’d had a crisis he would already have encouraged you to go outside the establishment more often. He tells me that as your trip to Arles5 brought on a crisis one would have to see if you can now bear a change before changing residence. 
   If you bear these ordeals well, he sees nothing against your leaving him. Now I’ve seen Pissarro and I’ve talked to him about the matter. I think that he doesn’t have much to say at home, where his wife wears the trousers. After a few days he told me that it wasn’t possible at his home, but that he knows someone in Auvers, who’s a doctor and does painting in his free moments. He tells me that he’s a man who has been in touch with all the Impressionists. He thinks that you could probably stay at his home. He’ll go and see him and speak to him about the matter. If you could find something around there, that would be a good thing, for I think that Brittany also has this cloister-like quality, and one feels that a lot even in the latest Gauguins, I find. Tomorrow Bernard is to come and see your paintings, and I’ll go to his home to see what he’s brought back. All in all I’m happy that you’re better, if your change of residence brought you first to Paris, that would give me great pleasure. We have good news of Mother and of Wil. Jo is well too, and sends warm regards. Good handshake. Theo 22 October 1889 My dear Vincent, Enclosed you’ll find 150 francs – for Mr Peyron1 and for your journey to Arles. I had said in my letters to Mr Peyron that he ought to tell me if he’d had additional expenses, he has never spoken of them. Ask him then, if you will, to tell me if anything is owing to him each time he acknowledges receipt of my monthly letter, then it doesn’t mount up. I hope that you’re 
   still well and that you have good luck with work. I’ve had several people to see your paintings. Israëls’ son, who has been living in Paris for a while, Veth, a Dutchman who does portraits and who writes in De Nieuwe Gids, that journal you’ve perhaps heard about that makes people so indignant3 but in which good things often appear, and then Van Rijsselberghe, one of the Vingtistes from Brussels, the latter also saw everything there is at Tanguy’s, and your works seem to interest him a great deal. In Belgium they’re already more accustomed to brightly coloured painting, the Vingtistes’ exhibition did a lot of good in that respect, despite the fact that nobody’s buying anything there. The Independents’ exhibition is 
   finished and I have your irises5 back; it’s one of your good things. I consider that you’re strongest when you’re doing real things, like that, or like the Tarascon diligence, or the child’s head, or the upright undergrowth with the ivy. The form is so well defined and the whole is full of colour. I clearly sense what preoccupies you in the new canvases like the village in the moonlight9 or the mountains, but I feel that the search for style takes away the real sentiment of things. In Gauguin’s last consignment there are the same preoccupations as with you, but with him there are a lot more memories 
   of the Japanese, the Egyptians etc. As for me, I prefer to see a local Breton woman than a Breton woman with the gestures of a Japanese woman, but in art there are no limits, so it’s quite permissible to do as one sees it. Guillaumin was in Auvergne this summer, from where he brought back some good canvases. He doesn’t search for much that’s new in the coloration. He’s content with what he’s found, and one always finds his same pink, orange and violet blue patches again, but his touch is vigorous and his view of nature is quite broad. Pissarro has left13 and will be busying himself with that worthy fellow in Auvers. I hope that he’ll succeed, and that next spring, if not sooner, you’ll come to see us. Jo is well, she’s getting considerably bigger and can already feel the child quickening, but that doesn’t cause her too much inconvenience. Mother sent us a letter from Cor. He has arrived in Johannesburg. It’s a very wild country where you have to walk around with a revolver all day. There are no plants, nothing but sand. Except in places that are like oases. My letter must go off. Jo sends her warm regards. Accept a good handshake, and Ever yours, Theo Marseille, 24 October 1889 Sir and dear friend Vincent Excuse me if I did not reply immediately I received your letter; I was waiting for the family. They arrived in the first week of October in very good health, Marcelle is still more than beautiful, she calls everyone by their names, in fact she’s a little parrot, she makes the whole house happy, at last by dint of patience I came to be with my family. I found this absence very long, happily despite the great heat I spent my summer in very good health. My wife was very happy to discover your kind letter on arrival, to learn 
   from it that you are in good health. In your letter you tell me that you have worked a lot, that you have twelve canvases prepared, I hope that you will finish them in good health and that these unfortunate crises will not recur any more; I am pleased that you are in correspondence with your brother and that your return to Paris is almost decided, I am charmed by it. Like you, I have a very heavy heart to see you go further from us; let us hope that one day again we shall have the happiness to shake hands and to tell each other in person such good things and to cement our friendship once more; I am confident and am full of hope to see you again one day, I am pleased to see you moving closer to your brother. When you are a little more comfortable alongside him and his wife, I think it will do an enormous amount of good for your health. I think that if you go and settle in the environs of Paris you will 
   take up your palette and brushes with much more strength, and from time to time you will be able to take on new strengths you have such need of, if you write to your brother give him my warm regards and those of my family. I have not been to Arles again and I do not know when I would be able to go there, I often see people from Arles who give me news of Ginoux, people have told me that everybody was well. All my family joins with me in sending you our best regards, we have my mother-in-law4 with us, Marcelle sends you a big kiss, as does Camille, who acts as my secretary. Armand has returned to work as a blacksmith in Lambesc. Mr Vincent, please accept the sincere regards of all my family as well as those of him who declares himself your truly devoted friend. I shake your hand in friendship. Roulin, Railway Postman rue Nicolas No. 46 third floor Marseille. My dear Vincent I received your letter the other day1 and I’m pleased to see that you’re recovered (if it’s not forever) at least for a long time: a time during which you’re going to be able to work. No, I wasn’t able to see your latest canvases, having been in Brittany for a long time, but De Haan, the Dutchman who is with me, received a letter from a friend telling him that your new canvases were really something very artistic and more imaginative than the others. I’m pleased that you remember our conversations about drawing, and De Haan, who has listened to me on that score, has made real progress here in this regard. I have little news to give you about our friends, as I myself am a little isolated from everything – Laval is in Paris – Bernard in St-Briac. His father has totally forbidden him to be in Pont-Aven with me. You will doubtless remember the bourgeois letter from the angry fellow. Bernard writes to me sometimes; he has greatly changed for the better, and as an artist he continues to do curious and beautiful things. It isn’t the same for me. I have an unfortunate nature which is thirsty for new things, and I can’t stop myself carrying out new researches. This year I’ve done work completely different from last year, preparatory work for a thing that I glimpse as important. At your place in Arles I did a painting a little in that direction – The grape harvests (a painting you did the drawing of). A woman seated, vines in a red triangle. Degas doesn’t understand, that man. In this order of abstract ideas I am led to seek synthetic form and colour.
   As little craft as possible, and here and there secondary motifs, very lightly executed, to allow the impression of a figure all its power and not to fall into trifles, childishness. In front of me I have several etchings, reproductions of paintings etc. by Rembrandt, and I find a lot of these things in there. In the one you have (the detailed angel’s head and the rest unfinished). In the Tobias, if, however, it is a Tobias, the lion is imposing, powerful, the landscape too, and the whole foreground area unfinished, the fellow too. It seemed to me that it was a standpoint, and I researched the reason why. And there’s no reason why, because I’m not a master, I shouldn’t enter into the order of ideas of a master like that one (with different applications). All this (my dear Vincent) leads to me being shouted at in Paris (and I feel that they’re wrong). This year I’ve made incredible efforts in work and reflection, and still it’s as if I’ve rested. At home I have a thing I haven’t sent and which would suit you, I think. It’s Christ in the Garden of Olives – blue-green sky, dusk, trees all bent into a purple mass, ground violet and Christ wrapped in a dark ochre garment has vermilion hair. As this canvas isn’t destined to be understood I’m keeping it for a long time. Included is this drawing, which will give you a vague idea of it. We, De Haan and I, have settled ourselves in for work and calm. Beside the sea I’ve found a large house11 which is rented out for only 2 months for sea bathing – because of that I got it very cheaply for the winter. The upper part is an immense terrace, 15 metres by 12 and 5 metres high – glazed on 2 sides. On one side we plunge 
   over an immense sea horizon. The storms are magnificent, and we paint them directly from the studio, right in the midst of the sensation of the terribleness of the waves striking black rocks. On the other side, red sands, fields, and a few farms surrounded by their trees. Models every day of women, men coming to herd the cows, or gather the seaweed from the sea. You can pose them as you wish for a franc. You can see that there’s everything one needs here to work. Beside us we have a little inn where we eat very well, not expensively. That deals with the material side. De Haan has completely set himself to work in our direction, and is getting along very well without losing his personality, and I promise you that now he understands Rembrandt better than before, as well as the Dutch masters. With the old masters there’s an intellectual bond that links them all together, and by doing as they do one succeeds in doing something else. There’s a paradox (but I understand myself). For 2 months I’ve been working on a large sculpture (of painted wood), and I dare believe that it’s the best thing I’ve done up to now as regards power and harmony – but the literary side of it is insane to many. A monster who looks like me is taking the hand of a naked woman – that’s the main subject. Figures (smaller) in the gaps. The top part a town, some sort of Babylon, the bottom the countryside with a few imagined flowers (an old and desolate woman) and a fox, the fateful animal of perversity for the Indians. It’s difficult to give you the feel of it with a drawing, you have to see the colour of the wood marrying with the background painted green, yellow ochre, and yellow flowers, golden hair, a few 
   greenish figures. For despite the inscription the people look sad, in contradiction to the title. On this waxed wood there are reflections where the light hits the parts in relief, imparting richness.  Paris, 16 Nov. 1889 My dear Vincent, I enclose a letter which Gauguin sent me for you. The wood he speaks of has also arrived here. What an excellent workman he is, this is worked with a care that must have demanded an enormous amount of work from him. Above all the woman’s figure is very beautiful, in waxed wood, while the surrounding figures are in rough wood and coloured. 
   It’s obviously bizarre and doesn’t express a very clear idea, but it’s beautiful like a piece of Japanese work, the significance of which is also hard to grasp, at least for a European, but in which one must admire the combinations of lines and the beautiful pieces. The whole has a very sonorous tone. I’d very much like you to be able to see it. You would certainly like it. I’ve been to Bernard’s this week, and he showed me what he has done lately. I think he’s made a lot of progress. His drawing is less determined, but it’s there all the same. There’s more flexibility in his touch. With him 
   there’s a more direct influence from the primitives, thus he has done a kneeling figure surrounded by angels. The ground is in large squares, and the figures are posed as if on a chessboard, but there’s one angel figure which really has nobility. He’s also done a Christ in the Garden of Olives. A red-headed, violet Christ with a yellow angel. It’s very difficult to understand, and the search for style often lends something ridiculous to his figures, but perhaps something good will come of it. When one sees a lot of paintings, so many that sometimes one would like not to see any for a while, what then satisfies one the most are the healthy, real things, without preoccupations about schools or abstract ideas. You’ll 
   perhaps tell me that any work of art must be the result of a quantity of complicated combinations, that’s right, but with the painter also there must be moments when he’s so inspired by his motif or his subject that he renders it as one might grasp it, or at least feel it like a thing one finds oneself in front of. I feel that in front of several of your canvases. There’s one at Tanguy’s at the moment, in the shop window, a view over the countryside in springtime with grey poplars crossing the canvas in such a way that you can’t see either the bottom or the top of the tree. I like it enormously. That truly is nature. This morning there was a letter for you from Les Vingt in Brussels, I put your address on it. A line from Maus that I received at the same 
   time tells me that they’d be happy if you would exhibit, paintings and drawings. When he came, he very much liked the apple trees in blossom, but Van Rijsselberghe grasps better what you’re seeking in the more recent things. The portrait of Roulin, The sunflowers10 etc. You must tell me what you think of the exhibition and what you want to send there. I believe there’s 5 to 7 metres of wall space. This year they’ve invited Puvis de Chavannes, Bartholomé, Cézanne, Dubois-Pillet, Forain, Signac, L. Pissarro, Hayet, Renoir, Sisley and De Lautrec and you. However bad the Independents’ exhibition was, The Irises12 were seen by a lot of people who talk to me about them. If we could have a regular exhibition in Paris of 
   artists little known by the public, that would be a good thing, but it would have to be almost a permanent exhibition. The premises are so expensive here, that will always be a drawback. Pissarro wrote to me that his wife and he have already had a little look round the country for a place for you to lodge, but he says that he thinks you’ll be better off with this Dr at Auvers; he says he’s to see him shortly. I’m pleased that you feel better; the more physical strength you have, the better. Write to me sometime about how your clothes are, don’t you need something warm? Fortunately Jo is well and sends her warm regards. Winter’s already starting here. Does the mistral blow in St-Rémy as it does in Arles? Good handshake and Ever yours, Theo Paris 8 Dec. 1889 My dear Vincent, Today we safely received the three rolls of paintings as well as your letter. Among the canvases there are some whose harmony is sought in less dazzling tones than generally; there is however a lot of atmosphere. How I agree with you when you say in your last letter 
   that you want to work like a cobbler, certainly that won’t prevent you from doing canvases that hold their own alongside those of the masters. What I consider modern times have done for art is that nowadays each person can do as he intends and he isn’t forced to work according to rules established by a school. This being the case, it’s permissible to do a piece of nature simply as one sees it, without being obliged to cut it like this or like that. The fondness the artist has for certain lines and certain colours will cause his soul to be reflected in them in spite of himself. 
   At the World Exhibition there was a little painting by Manet, which perhaps you saw earlier at Portier’s. It shows a young woman in a white dress sitting against a green knoll beside a little carriage with a child inside. The father is lying nonchalantly on the grass behind the woman. This is certainly one of the paintings that aren’t only the most modern, but also in which there is the highest art. I think that the searches for symbolism, for example, need go no further than this painting, and the symbol isn’t deliberate. Lately Tanguy has been exhibiting a lot of your canvases, he told me 
   that he hopes to sell the Bench with the ivy. It’s a fine choice you’ve made for Brussels. I’ve ordered frames. For the Sunflowers5 I’m leaving the little wooden edge that’s around it, and a white frame around that. For the others, white or natural wood frames. You don’t tell me if you want to exhibit drawings. When Maus was here he liked them very much and asked above all for some to be sent. We could perhaps send several of them in a frame. You often used to say that a book should be published about Monticelli. Well, I’ve seen about twenty very fine lithographs after him done by someone called Lauzet. There will also be text, the artist is to come and see our paintings to see if there are any he wants to reproduce. It will be especially good for the English 
   and the Scottish. The lithographs are printed in different tones, and in terms of the process they somewhat resemble etchings on stone, like Marvy made back then;8 the man who did them is a real artist. That friend of Bernard’s called Aurier also came to my place, the one who came to rue Lepic once. He’s very interested in what you’re doing and showed me a little journal he ran in which he talked about Tanguy’s shop, and in which he also mentions your paintings. Here we are in the full throes of winter and there’s snow on the roofs. How’s the climate where you are? I’m writing to Mr Peyron
   to tell him that you’ll probably be obliged to work in a room, and that in that case will he please let you make a fire, the cost of which he can add to my account. I’m very pleased that you can say that you’re well. For the future, who can say, above all don’t worry yourself more than necessary. One day or another there will indeed be better days for you, and we’ll see each other more often. The Corots, Millets etc. didn’t sell their painting for high prices but they nevertheless ended up selling, but one must have patience. Jo sends her warm regards, we’ve received a whole consignment of little things for the baby from Amsterdam. You’ll do its portrait when it’s here. Wil is probably coming to lend us a hand in January. They’re enjoying themselves in Leiden. Be of good heart. Ever yours, Theo My dear Vincent, I should have replied to your long letter1 ages ago; I know how isolated you are in Provence and that you like to receive news from the pals who interest you, and yet many circumstances have prevented me from doing so. Among others, a rather large job which De Haan and I have undertaken together: a decoration for the inn where we eat2. You begin with one wall, then you end up doing all four, even the stained-glass window. It’s something that teaches you a lot, and so it’s useful. De Haan has done a large panel on the actual plaster, 2 metres by 1. high. Enclosed I’m sending you a swift croquis of the thing. Peasant women from around here working with hemp against a background of ricks of straw.   I consider it very good and very complete, done as seriously as a painting.  After that I did a peasant woman spinning at the sea’s edge, her dog and her cow. Our two portraits on each door. In the fever of work, and the haste to see it all finished, bedtime arrived all of a sudden and I postponed my letter until later – now let’s chat.   I’ve only done one religious painting this year, and it’s good sometimes to make attempts of every sort, so as to sustain one’s imaginative powers, and afterwards one looks at nature with pleasure again. Anyway, that’s all a matter of temperament. What I myself have done most of all this year are simple peasant children, 
   walking indifferently beside the sea with their cows. But because I don’t like the trompe l’oeil of the outdoors and of whatever else, I try to put into these desolate figures the savagery that I see in them, and that’s in me too. Here in Brittany the peasants have a medieval look about them and don’t appear to think for a moment that Paris exists and that we’re in the year 1889 – quite the opposite of the south. Here everything is rough like the Breton language, very closed-in (for evermore, it seems). The costumes are also almost symbolic, influenced by the superstitions of Catholicism. Look at the back, bodice a cross,  
  What the devil, I want to consult nature too, but I don’t want to take from it what I see there and what comes into my mind. The rocks, the costumes are black and yellow; I can’t put them down as blond and coquettish, can I? Still fearful of Our Lord and the priest, the Breton men hold their hats and all their utensils as if they were in a church; I also paint them in that state and not with a southern verve.  At the moment I’m doing a no. 50 canvas, of women gathering wrack at the sea’s edge. They’re like boxes stacked up here and there, blue clothing and black coifs 
   and this despite the bitterness of the cold. Manure which they gather to fertilize their land, red-brown ochre with ruddy highlights. Pink sands, not yellow, because of the damp probably – dark sea. Seeing this every day I get a kind of gust of wind for life, of sadness and obedience to unfortunate laws. I try to put this gust of wind on canvas, not haphazardly but rationally, perhaps exaggerating a certain rigidity of pose, certain sombre colours etc... All of this is mannered perhaps, but where’s the natural in a painting? Everything in paintings since the most distant ages has been completely conventional, deliberate throughout and very far from the natural, consequently very mannered. You’ll say that they, the ancient masters, have genius. That’s true, and we don’t have it, but that’s no reason not to proceed like them. To a Japanese person what we do is mannered and vice versa; this comes from the fact that there’s a notable distance between the two in vision, customs and types. So if a man sees, feels, thinks differently from the mass because of race, temperament or other cause, he is unnatural and consequently mannered.
     You’ve seen the doorway to St Trophime in Arles, perceived and executed very differently from the manner of the northerners, with proportions far removed from nature, and you admired that, without any nightmare10 – no, in art (the truth is what one feels, in the state of mind one’s in). Let him who wishes or who can, dream. Let him who wants to or who can, drift along. And the dream always comes from the reality in nature. In a dream, an Indian savage will never see a man dressed the way they are in Paris – etc...  De Haan is still working at Le Pouldu, thanks you for your kind regards and sends his best wishes.   He (alone) is the creator of Uriel, the painting you spoke of in a letter to Isaäcson.   I know nothing about your drawing after Rembrandt which you were proposing to exchange with me (which I’ll do with pleasure).  I shake your hand cordially. 
 Ever yours, P. Gauguin. Paris 22 Dec. 1889 My dear Vincent, I’ve safely received your consignment of the Wheatfield1 and the two Bedrooms. Above all I like the last one, which in terms of colour is like a bouquet of flowers. It has a very great intensity of colour. The Wheatfield perhaps has more poetry; it’s like a memory of something one has seen. Tanguy is mounting it at the moment, and on 3 January everything is leaving for Brussels. Now I have something 
   that gave me great pleasure. I was visited at home by Mr Lauzet, Monticelli’s lithographer. He came to see ours, and considers them very fine. As regards the flowers, he doesn’t think he can render them, as the prints are monochrome and he doesn’t think he can render the feeling of this painting in one colour. He’s starting with the Italian woman. But what pleased him above all was your canvases and your drawings, oh but he understands them. He’s been seeing them for a long time at Tanguy’s, and he was really pleased to see all that I had here, while going through the drawings there was a woman picking up apples8 that he liked, and I made him a present of it, for I think you’d have done the same. He 
   came back to the shop the next day to ask me if there wouldn’t be some way of having another drawing you did right at the beginning when you were at St-Rémy. On the left a little thicket of dark trees against a sky with a crescent moon, on the right a gate. He told me that he couldn’t get this drawing out of his mind, that it was finer than the drawings of V. Hugo, which he likes a great deal etc. I suggested that he exchange it for a copy of his Monticelli album, which he accepted immediately. The album is still far from being ready but he will finish it, Cottier and Reid have put their names down for several copies so he’s covered for the printing costs. There are 16 lithographs ready out of 25 he wants to do. 
   What I consider the most successful thing is the head of a child we saw once at La Roquette’s. The artist seems very sympathetic to me. He’s from the south and has something of the Spaniard about him, pale face and black beard, but at the same time something gentle like an English poet. It’s a great pity he hasn’t done any prints in several colours, for one doesn’t realize the strength of the colour that Monticelli was one of the first to employ by using an opposition to obtain power while remaining harmonious. The prints that I’ve seen resemble etchings on stone like Marvy did. You say that you sometimes think that you would have done better by remaining a dealer, but don’t say that. Look at Gauguin for example, I do like his talent and I’m well aware12 of what he wants, but I haven’t managed to sell anything 
   whatsoever of his, and yet I have all kinds of things by him. The public is most rebellious towards things that aren’t done in perfect order. And it’s evident that Gauguin, who is half Inca, half European, superstitious like the former and advanced in ideas like certain of the latter, can’t work every day in the same way. It’s most unfortunate that we can’t find something he can live from. These latest paintings are less saleable than last year’s. He wrote to me last week that one of his children fell out of a window and was picked up almost dead. There is hope, though, of saving it. He’d do anything to obtain a little money, but I can’t procure any for him. 
   Pissarro, too, is at bay. He works like a negro. He made a very pretty fan for Jo. Women chatting in the fields with a rainbow in the background, up to now he hasn’t yet seen this gentleman from Auvers, at least he writes nothing about the subject, the best thing will be for you to come to us in the spring and go yourself to see if you can find lodgings that suit you in the country. We must in any case be pleased that you’re much better than you were this time last year. Then I feared that you might not recover. We’re expecting Wil on 2 Jan., she’ll stay a month with us. I share your opinion that I’d be delighted if she could see her way to marrying, and the man who had her would find a charming wife in her. 
   Cor writes quite often from the Transvaal. Life down there can’t be much fun. There are no plants or flowers. If the heat isn’t torrid, it rains so much that everything is flooded. The days are all absolutely alike, which is why he says he detests Sundays and other time off. You know that Isaäcson was to go there too, but as his friends in Amsterdam are very kind to him, and I think that as long as they support him he’ll stay there and will be able to occupy himself over there. The Transvaal isn’t to be recommended, from what one can gather. Here the weather is abominable, cold and grey; almost everybody is ill. How are you? Is it 
   as cold down there as in Arles? I’m curious to see your Olive trees. They can be beautiful. The Sunflowers20 were on show at Tanguy’s this week and made a very good effect. Your paintings cheer up Tanguy’s shop, and père Tanguy likes them a lot, but he sells as few by others as by you. I very much like the two drawings you sent. Do you want me to send some to Brussels? Reply immediately on this subject, for there’s no time to lose for the framing. Jo sends her warm regards, she’s very well, relatively speaking. I hope that you’ll do the little one’s portrait this spring. I shake your hand firmly, and hope that you’ll have a good end to the year. Yours, Theo I received your postcard, the paintings will be ready in time. 3 Jan. 1890 My dear Vincent, I was pleasantly surprised by your letter, for after receiving a line from Mr Peyron2 I didn’t dare hope that it would be possible for you to write, and I won’t hide from you that it grieved me very much. It’s curious that this has taken hold of you again, precisely a year after the first attack, and it proves that you must remain on your guard. So if you know that it’s dangerous 
   at times to have paints near you, why not set them aside for a while by making drawings? Like the other times, this crisis may be followed by another, although much less violent. I think that at such moments you’ll do better not to want to work with colour. In a while from now nothing will prevent you from starting again. As regards the consignment for Brussels, there’s a misunderstanding. In reading my letter to you, good Doctor Peyron made a mistake. The paintings were ready in time and are leaving today. What I was asking you was if you wanted to add a few 
   drawings to them. To return again to what I was saying to you, if you didn’t work with colour for a while, nothing will prevent you from doing drawings. Wil is with us since yesterday evening, she looks well and brings good news from home, your letter gave Mother great pleasure. I have no news of Gauguin. He’s fortunate to have De Haan with him, for it’s he who pays everything for his upkeep and his paint, but I don’t know if he’ll be able to continue forever. I hope that you’re already much better and that the illness won’t return. Warm regards from Jo and from Wil. Be of good heart, and look after yourself. Ever yours, Theo  8 Jan. 1890 My dear Vincent, When I last wrote to you1 it was under the impression of Dr Peyron’s first letter. I’m very, very glad that it isn’t as bad as that letter made me assume, and he himself wrote to me again to say that it had taken a quite different turn than he had thought at first. In his first letter 
   he gave me to understand that it was dangerous for you to continue to paint, as the paints were a poison, but he got a little carried away, perhaps through simply relying on hearsay, being ill himself. Let’s hope, then, that you may continue to work as you intend to. Tasset must have dispatched a new consignment of colours and canvas to you. Yesterday evening your new consignment arrived, and it’s very remarkable. You know, one of the things I like best is the Evening after Millet. Copied like that it’s no longer a copy. There’s a tone in it and everything is so harmonious. It’s really very successful. Among the other canvases I very much 
   like the women climbing on the rocks4 and the main road with the road-menders. I feel that there’s more atmosphere in your latest works, more distance than in the preceding ones. Which comes perhaps from the fact that you don’t use so much impasto everywhere. In one of the rolls there was also a superb pen drawing of a fountain in a garden;6 next Sunday I have a meeting with Lauzet – who will find them very fine, I’m sure. I share your opinion that it would perhaps be good that you should come here for a while this spring, even if you go to the country afterwards if the life here doesn’t suit you. 
   Here there’ll always be the matter of you being unable to work outdoors, but you will see, and in any case we’ll be happy to have you with us for a while. Jo’s confinement should take place between 1 and 15 February, and after that her mother is staying for around a month, but after she’s left the little room is free and at your disposal. Jo is very well and doesn’t feel much discomfort from her pregnancy. The doctor also thinks that it will go well. Wil arrived with such a bad cold that she had to stay in bed this morning, but I hope that she’ll be rid of it with a day or two’s care. It’s kind of Mr Salles to go and see you. I wrote to him on New Year’s Day but I hadn’t dared ask him to go and see you. I’m very pleased that this time the crisis passed so quickly. Be of good heart, and warm regards from Jo and from Wil, good handshake, and thank you very much for the consignment, which gave us great pleasure. Ever yours, Theo My dear Vincent Life is very long and very sad. Since your last letter I’ve been so deep in the doldrums that I couldn’t write, in the daytime wishing to see the evening, and at night awaiting the morning. Once the land is ploughed, the man casts the seed, and each day defending himself against the vagaries of the bad weather he manages to harvest. But what of us poor artists? Where does the seed we plant go, and when does the harvest come? In the 3 months I’ve been at Le Pouldu I’ve had 30 francs in my pocket; it’s obviously pointless my putting energy into it, I can’t carry on painting. 
   Apart from these money troubles I’ve had other causes for sorrow. I almost lost one of my children, who fell from the 3rd floor into the street. You will understand that in Copenhagen the household was overwhelmed, and that the expenses occasioned by this accident are throwing things into chaos (chaos which I’m powerless to remedy at the moment). All of this makes me sick with spleen, and I dare neither paint nor write. And why paint? I very much like the 2 drawings you sent me, especially the one of the women who are picking olives. I’m pleased that you’ve exhibited in Brussels; have you any news of this exhibition. Let me know. Like us you have winter 
   at the moment, and I know that for you it’s a harsh time to get through. You’re probably awaiting the heat with impatience so that you can work out of doors. I’m doing everything I can at the moment to leave for Tonkin at government expense, but it isn’t easy, especially because I’m an artist and people don’t believe that they have any capacity for business. In the colonies there’s something for us westerners to do, and I hope to learn something new there in art at the same time as being relieved of financial worries for a time. De Haan is still working here with me and making serious progress, but doesn’t want to return to Holland until 
   he feels strong enough to silence his compatriots; they’re going to say harsh words to him about his transformation. These new questions of colour had greatly tormented him, but today, when he’s beginning to see clearly in this new way, he’s full of ardour. Excuse my delay in writing, and believe me always Ever yours cordially, Paul Gauguin Paris 22 Jan. 1890 My dear Vincent, I’m very glad to know that you’re better and that the journey to Arles took place without bad consequences. I have various things to tell you, which will probably please you. First Lauzet came back to see your new canvases2 and his exclamation 
   after seeing a few canvases was ‘This really is Provence’. He, who’s from those parts, knows the area and detests the sugary things the Montenards and others bring back from there. Moreover you’re going to be able to chat to the man himself, for last Saturday he left for Marseille for a fortnight, and on his way back he’ll do what he can to call in on you. If you see him, please tell him that I have another subscription to his Monticelli work, Artist’s proofs, that will please him. The other evening he was at our home again, and then we 
   looked together at Amand-Durand’s work on the etchings by A. Dürer. You’ll see what an interesting fellow he is and how well-versed he is in modern literature. It appears that the exhibition of Les Vingt in Brussels is open; I read in a newspaper that the canvases which excite the greatest curiosity are the open-air studies by Cézanne, Sisley’s landscapes, Van Gogh’s symphonies and the works of Renoir. A new exhibition of the Impressionists is being prepared here for March, in the Ville de Paris pavilion. Everyone will be able to send along as many canvases as they want. Guillaumin is going to exhibit there too. Think whether you want to exhibit too, and which canvases. The exhibition of Les Vingt 
   will be over by then. I think that if we can wait patiently until success comes, you will surely see it. One must make oneself known without wanting to impose oneself: this will come of its own accord through your fine works. As regards what you write about the future, try and see if a partnership couldn’t be entered into with Lauzet. You could, for example, look for a studio for the two of you, and you could come and have dinner and sleep with us. As regards the furniture, I fear that the transportation will cost at least what it’s worth, and I’m wondering if it wouldn’t be better to sell it in Arles. I’m finding out about the establishments in Holland which might be suitable, but I’ve already been told that they’re so full that it’s 
   difficult to be admitted. There’s Geel in Belgium, but I don’t know precisely what one must do to have oneself admitted. In any event I hope that you’ll come to us for a while to see our friends again and to see our little one. Jo is fortunately very well, we’re approaching the end now, for we hope that she’ll be delivered at the beginning of February. Wil is much better and looks extremely well. I would very much like her to find a way of getting married, but to whom? Isaäcson has left, and since he has a wife with a child in Amsterdam9 I don’t think that he’d be the man. He was to leave for the Transvaal but is still 
   in Amsterdam. Next, what I consider a very bad side to him, he doesn’t do a damned thing. To hear him talk you’d say he works a lot, but if he shows something it’s quite inane. As regards painting, he has very little talent and I very much believe that he doesn’t have enough willpower to set himself seriously to work. Do you know that when I saw your olive trees again, I found them more and more beautiful, the one with the sunset is especially superb. How you have worked since last year, it’s prodigious. I’m curious to see the other Millets. A collection of facsimiles of original Rembrandt drawings has just been published in London. It’s superb, Seymour Haden is in charge of supervising the printing. Unfortunately they sell at a really high price, 600 francs for the collection of 400 prints. The Rev. Salles came to see us last Sunday, but unfortunately we’d gone out. I had very much wanted to see him at our home. I say ‘à bientôt’, look after yourself, and be of good heart. Ever yours, Theo My dear Vincent Thanks for your letter and for your projected proposals, they gave me a lot to think about, and I admit that I consider life together possible, very possible, but with many precautions. Your state of ill-health, which isn’t yet completely cured, requires calm and a lot of careful handling. You say yourself that memories disturb you when you go to Arles. Do you not fear that I may also be a similar cause? In any event, it wouldn’t seem prudent to me to start out in a town where you’d find yourself isolated and consequently lack immediate care should you relapse – 
   so I’m looking for the most propitious place. We’ve chatted about this with De Haan (a completely serious man), and I consider that Antwerp would completely fit the bill. Because life is as cheap as in some provincial hole. Next, because there are museums which aren’t to be sneered at for painters. Then one can work for sale there. Why shouldn’t we found a studio in my name; with a few connections, with our names a little known through the Vingtistes1 it would be possible, and however little one does one is still making a profitable step. In my opinion, Impressionism won’t really 
   find its place in France until it’s back from abroad. It’s there where one reasons about it best and gives it the warmest welcome, so it’s there that one must work. You will be two Dutchmen, that’s to say from the country, although Antwerp is Belgian. There’s been an exhibition of mine in Copenhagen recently with works that were previously refused, as I told you. Well it was very successful. It’s an indication that the 1st work I did was bearing fruit after germinating slowly. In the same way in Antwerp, by bestirring ourselves, 3 talented fellows, firm in their beliefs, we’ll take a step forward. And a little later, if it works out a bit, why not make 
   a small branch of your brother’s in terms of selling. Your brother could lend you a few canvases by other artists, and with this drop of water hollow out the rock. There you have it, my dear Vincent, broadly speaking my opinion on your project. Answer me with your frank opinion about it. In any event, all of this is very cloudy, since I’m pursuing my Tonkin project vigorously. At the moment we have spring tide storms that are keeping us in the studio, and it’s very sad. Best wishes. Ever yours, P. Gauguin Regards from De Haan. Wednesday evening Dear Vincent, I’ve been meaning to write to you day after day since Christmas — there’s even a half-finished letter to you in my writing-case — and now — if I don’t make haste to write this note you’d get the news that your namesake was here — before then I just want to bid you good-day. It’s just midnight — the doctor’s sleeping for a while because he wanted to stay here tonight. Theo, Ma1 and Wil are sitting at the table with me — awaiting the things that will come — it’s a strange feeling — always that wondering — will  
       the baby be here tomorrow morning? I can’t write much — but I so much wanted just to talk to you for a moment. This morning Theo brought in the article in the Mercure, and after we’d read it Wil and I talked about you for a long time — I’m so longing for your next letter, which Theo is also looking forward to. Shall I read it? But everything has gone so well up to now — I’ll just keep my spirits up. This evening — all these last few days in fact — I’ve thought about it so much, whether I really have been able to do something to 
   make Theo happy in his marriage. He’s done it for me. He’s been so good to me; so good — if things don’t go well — if I have to leave him — you tell him — for there’s no one in the world whom he loves as much — that he must never regret that we were married, because he’s made me so happy. It sounds sentimental — a message like this — but I can’t tell him now — half of my company has gone to bed, him too because he was so tired. Oh if only I 
   can just give him a dear, healthy little boy, wouldn’t that make him happy? I’ll just close, because I keep having waves of pain which mean that I can’t think or write properly. When you get this it will all be over. Believe me, your loving Jo  31 January 1890 My dear Vincent, Dr Peyron writes to me that you have again been seized by an attack of your illness. My poor brother, I’m infinitely sorry that things aren’t going as they should. Fortunately, the previous times this didn’t 
   last long, and so we hope with all possible fervour that you may soon be better this time too. It’s the only cloud in our happiness, for my dear brother, the bad moment for Jo is over. She has brought into the world a fine boy who cries a lot but who seems to be in good health. My poor little wife suffered a great deal because the waters broke too soon, but fortunately we had an excellent doctor with extraordinary patience, for any other in his place would 
   certainly have used the forceps. Jo is very well and hasn’t yet had any fever, but it could still come. The child is already beginning to cry lustily. How happy I’d be if in a while, when Jo’s well again, you’ll be able to come and see her and see our little one! As we told you, we’ll name him after you, and I’m making the wish that he may be as determined and as courageous as you. As soon as you can, 
   write to me to tell me how you are and if there were any incidents that provoked the new crisis. We often talk about you and we think about you even more. I hope with all my heart that you may soon be better. Be of good heart and Ever yours, Theo Vincent Mr and Mrs Theo van Gogh-Bonger are honoured to inform you of the birth of their son Vincent Willem. Paris, 31 January 1890 8, cité Pigalle. Paris 9 Feb. 1890 My dear Vincent You gave us great pleasure with your last letter, and fortunately we can see that things are going fairly well as regards your health. Things are going well at home with us, Jo is nursing the baby and has no lack of milk, and the little one sometimes lies down with his eyes wide open and his fists against his face. Then he has the look of being completely well. He has blue eyes like the baby
   you painted, and fat cheeks. He gives his mother all sorts of trouble, but that seems inevitable and she bears it very well. In a few days from now she’ll be able to get up. This morning Wil left, she gave us a lot of help in the household. She’s a good girl. I was once with her at Degas’s place; he said that she reminded him of several figures from the old Dutch paintings, and made him very much want to go and see the museums in our country. He brought out several things to show her, which pleased her greatly. She understood the female nudes very well. One morning, too, we were in the Louvre, where several paintings 
   have been moved. The Vermeer of Delft4 at eye height, Rembrandt’s little Philosophers5 are cleaned a little, which enables one to see them as never before. The Infanta Marguerita6 is in the Salon Carré. Anyway, they’ve made a few reorganizations that were really necessary. The doctor who came to Jo said of Wil, she’s really much too good to get married. Nevertheless I’d be really happy if she were. Yesterday Gauguin came to Paris and he asked a lot of questions about you. He has come here to see if he can find a position to do anything at all to earn his living, for it seems that De Haan is very hard up too. His family don’t understand at all why he doesn’t remain with them, and as 
   they’re terrible Jews they’re probably thinking that they can force him to come back by cutting off his allowance. De Haan sent me a painting to dispatch to his brother. One can see that he’s trying very hard, it’s pink and orange onions, green apples and an earthenware pot. It’s very carefully studied as regards values and influence of tones, one on another. I’d like to see a little more casualness in it, but it’s very carefully studied and kept in quite a bright range of colours. There are three exhibitions here, of the Mirlitons, the Volney circle and the Aquarellistes, but there is, so to speak, nothing good in them, it’s as if the men with the power are becoming more and more senile. I hope that your health will continue to be good and that the things that make you worry will disappear. Warm regards from Jo, be of good heart, and thank you again for your kind letter. Handshake. Theo Paris, 19 March 1890 My dear Vincent, We were really pleased to receive your last letter, but we’re sorry from the bottom of our hearts that you can’t give us better news. You’ll need an enormous amount of patience to overcome the trouble your condition must cause you. However, there’s a tendency to improvement, which we must begin by being extremely glad about. The cold weather always has an influence on you, and so it’s possible that milder weather will cure you entirely, 
   let’s hope so, and don’t tire yourself out too much. How pleased I would have been if you’d been there at the Independents’ exhibition. It was the day of the private viewing when Carnot came. I was there with Jo. Your paintings are well placed and look very well. Many people came up to ask me to give you their compliments. Gauguin said that your paintings are the key to the exhibition. He suggests an exchange of one of his canvases for the one of the Alpilles. I told him that I didn’t think you’d have any objection, on the contrary that it would please you that he likes your painting. I also like it very much, that painting, and it looks admirably well in the exhibition. Seurat exhibited a most curious painting there, searching to express 
   things through the direction of the line. Certainly he expresses movement, but it has a most curious appearance and not very generous as regards ideas. Guillaumin is exhibiting several things, some very good ones among them, De Lautrec has an excellent portrait of a woman at the piano, and a large painting which holds its own very well. There’s a great distinction in it, despite the risqué subject. In general it’s noticeable that the public is beginning to be more and more interested in the young Impressionists, there are at least a certain number of art lovers who are beginning to buy them. The Pissarro exhibition is over, lots of people came, and 5 were sold. For the moment that’s all we were hoping for. Next Sunday Bernard and Aurier are to come and see your latest 
   canvases. Bernard has been a bit ill but is feeling better. Enclosed with this you’ll find a letter from Aurier. He’s to come shortly to see the Gauguins and do an article on him. I’ve received the money for your painting from Brussels, and Maus writes to me: ‘When you have an opportunity please tell your brother that I was very happy that he participated in the Salon of Les Vingt where, in the melée of discussions, he found lively artistic sympathies’. Do you want me to send you the money? I’m holding it for you for whenever you want it. I hope, my dear brother, that you can soon give us more satisfactory news of your health. You’d feel happier if you saw your little godson. Try to find out from Dr Peyron if he sees no danger in your coming to Paris when you’ve recovered from this crisis. Jo sends you her warm regards, and joins with me in sending best wishes for your speedy recovery. Good handshake. Theo My dear Vincent I’ve looked most attentively at your works since we parted; first at your brother’s place1 and at the Independents’ exhibition. It’s above all at this latter place that one can properly judge what you do, either because of things positioned beside each other, or because of the neighbouring works. I offer you my sincere compliments, and for many artists you are the most remarkable in the exhibition. With things from nature you’re the only one there who thinks. I’ve talked about it with your brother, and there’s one that I would like to exchange with you for a thing
   of your choice. The one I’m talking about is a mountain landscape. Two tiny travellers seem to be climbing up there in search of the unknown. It contains an emotion à la Delacroix, with a very evocative colour. Here and there red notes like lights, the whole in a violet note. It’s beautiful and imposing.   I’ve talked at length about it with Aurier, Bernard and many others. All send you their compliments. Only Guillaumin shrugs his shoulders when he hears of it. Besides, I understand him, 
   given that he only sees material things, with a brainless eye. He’s the same when it comes to my painting over these last few years, and understands nothing of it. I hesitated greatly to write to you, knowing that you had just had a rather long crisis, so please don’t reply to me until you feel completely strong. Let’s hope that with the warm weather that will return you’re going to get well at last, the winter is always dangerous to you. 
   Cordially Ever yours, Paul Gauguin Paris, 29 March 1890 My dear Vincent, How pleased I would be to be able to go and see you tomorrow to shake your hand on your birthday. Will it be a celebration for you, or are you still in a state where you find yourself unhappy? What do you do during the day, and have you something to do to distract yourself? Can you read, and do you have what you need? I was hoping 
   after your last letter2 that you had begun to convalesce, and that soon afterwards you would have written that you were feeling better. My dear brother, how sad it is to be so far from one another and to know so little of what the other is doing. That’s why I’m very happy to be able to tell you that I’ve met Dr Gachet. That doctor Pissarro had spoken to me about. He looks like a man who understands things well. He resembles you a little. When you come here we’ll go and see him, he comes to give consultations in Paris several times a week. He said to me when I told him how your crises occurred that he didn’t believe that this had anything to do with madness 
   and that if it was what he thought, he replied that he would cure you, but he needed to see you and talk to you to be able to give his opinion with greater certainty. He’s a man who can be very useful to us if you come here. Have you spoken to Dr Peyron about it yet, and what does he say about it? I haven’t yet gone back to the Independents, but Pissarro who went there every day tells me that you have a real success among the artists. There are also art lovers who spoke to me about it before I’d pointed them out to them. The newspapers which give an account of the exhibition are silent on the Impressionists’ hall. That’s still the best they can do, for the majority of these critics, you know very well what they’re worth. The weather here is beginning 
   to be really springlike. This afternoon Jo and the child were in the little square in front of the Trinity. The shrubs are beginning to become green and the trees are showing green points on the buds, everything was bathed in benevolent sunshine, and the grey of the church against the intense blue of the sky was really beautiful. Jo and the child are doing well. From time to time there is of course something amiss, but nothing serious. The doctor who came this week said that he was a magnificent child, and paid Jo compliments. You’ll see how funny his movements are. My dear brother, I have a very great desire to hear if you’re feeling better and to have details about your health. Be of good heart, and remain hopeful that things will get better soon. I’m sending you a few reproductions of etchings by Rembrandt, they’re so beautiful. Good handshake, and believe me your brother who loves you, Theo Paris 29 March ’90 Dear Vincent, Among all the letters from brothers and sisters, mine wishing you the best may not be missing tomorrow, and I do it at the same time on behalf of your godchild, who can’t do it very well himself yet. He always looks with very great interest at Uncle Vincent’s paintings, though — in particular the tree in blossom that hangs over our bed2 really fascinates him — and the Rembrandt3 too, although I can’t swear that it isn’t the gold frame that attracts him. He’s thriving, fortunately — we’re longing 
   to show him to you. But there’s still a whole art to being father and mother — perhaps it’s because I’ve had to learn and experience so many things in this one year — because I’ve never heard other people talk about it like this — they had a child and then everything was all right and happened of its own accord — but with me it’s not like that. What surprises me most is that such a tiny baby already has its own personality, in the face of which you’re utterly powerless. He can sometimes look at me as if he wants to say: what are you actually doing to me — I 
   know much more about things than you do — they’re the eyes of a grown-up, and then with a great deal of expression — could he have the makings of a philosopher? He doesn’t leave his mother much free time at all, but I did escape briefly for the opening of the Independents to see your paintings hanging — there was a bench just in front, and while Theo talked to all sorts of people I spent a quarter of an hour enjoying the wonderful coolness and freshness of the undergrowth4 — it’s as if I know that little spot and have often been there — I love it so much. It’s like summer here — indescribably hot 
   and I think with dread of the hot days still to come — it sounds a bit like sacrilege — with that first delicate tender green on the trees now, but after all I like the winter much better. I must make haste to end my letter because Theo’s waiting for it. With best wishes Your loving Jo Paris, 23 April 1890 My dear Vincent, Your silence proves to us that you’re still suffering, and I need to tell you, my dear brother, that Jo and I are also suffering, knowing that you’re still ill. Oh, we’d be so happy if we could do something for you that might give you relief. Dr Peyron writes to us that we mustn’t worry, and that this crisis, although longer than the 
   others, will also pass. If the distance weren’t so great I would certainly have come to see you already, and I’m counting on you, the day you need me, or feel that it could do you some good to talk with me, to let me know and I’ll come running immediately. Last week I had been married for a year already. How swiftly time passes. We have every reason to be satisfied with that year. I haven’t forgotten that you insisted a great deal on my getting married, and you saw rightly, for I feel much, much happier. It’s true that 
   my wife isn’t just anyone, and that I was enormously lucky to find her. We get along very well and our domestic life is very agreeable. The little one gives Jo, especially, a great deal of work, but he’s growing amazingly. He’s nervous by nature, but very sweet. He can stay awake for hours without crying, and he’s beginning to laugh and to make sounds that must be the beginnings of speech. It would do you good if you could see him and play with him. At Whitsun we intend to go and spend the two feast days at Pissarro’s, who has invited us. This summer he’s going to London 
   to work. Your paintings at the exhibition are very successful. The other day Duez stopped me in the street and said, give my compliments to your brother and tell him that his paintings are quite remarkable. Monet said that your paintings were the best in the exhibition. Many other artists have spoken to me about them. Serret came to the house to see the other canvases and was delighted. He says that if he didn’t have a genre in which he still had things to say he would change and search along the path where you’re searching. Lauzet is back, he wasn’t able to stop by and see you, because his mother and sister who lived in Marseille have come to stay with him here, and he had to help them move house and didn’t have the money to go out of his way. My dear brother, you should know that nothing in the world would give me greater pleasure than knowing you were happy and well, and that every day I make wishes for your speedy recovery. Be of good heart, and good handshake from Jo and from your brother who loves you. Theo Paris, 3 May 1890 My dear Vincent, I can’t tell you how pleased I was by your letter, or rather your two letters;1 I was saying to Jo the day before my birthday2 that if a letter came from Vincent I would no longer know what I could wish for to complete my happiness. And there you are, your letter arrived. Of course I’d like you to feel better still, and above all that your sadnesses might 
   be dispelled. Your consignment of canvases has arrived too, and there are some that are very, very beautiful. The orderly3 and the other fellow with his swollen face4 are extraordinary, the branch of the almond trees in blossom5 shows that you haven’t exhausted these subjects. You may have missed the season of the blossoming trees this year, but let’s hope that that won’t be the case next time. The Millet copies6 are perhaps the finest things you’ve done, and make me believe that big surprises still await us the day you set yourself to doing figure compositions. The consignment of Tasset
   and Tanguy colours has left, I hadn’t yet received your second letter, and I told myself that you could well use the extra half. The Aurier canvas8 is one of the finest you’ve yet done, it has the richness of a peacock’s tail. I’ll take it to him directly, I’d had the frame made that you described, for I certainly owe him that, and he isn’t rich. And now the most important thing in your second letter, that is your plans to come here. I’m very happy that you feel the strength to undertake a change, and I absolutely agree that you should come as soon as possible, but you say that I myself must fix the time when you’re to come. I daren’t take a decision, and only you, with Dr Peyron’s advice, 
   can take this responsibility upon yourself. Your journey to Arles was absolutely disastrous for you, will the travelling not do you harm this time? If I were you I’d act entirely in accordance with Mr Peyron’s view, and in any event on the day you’ve decided to come here you absolutely must be accompanied during the entire journey by someone you trust. The fatigue of the journey and the sensation of rediscovering places you have known may have an influence on your illness. If possible I’d so much like to have you with us at least for a while, and if you do everything to take care of yourself it’s very likely that all will go well. You say that the people down there understand nothing of painting, but here it’s absolutely the same, and you mustn’t think that you’ll find it otherwise anywhere, except as an exception. We have frequented one category of people, who have made it their principal occupation, but apart from them it’s Hebrew to the people, and simple things are even less understood than there where one can puzzle over the subject etc. I hope that you’ll be able to write to me that you’re getting better and better, and that your plans can soon be realized. However, don’t have too many illusions about life in the north, after all every part of the world has its pros and cons. I’ll write to you soon and shall look for lithographs of the masters. I’ll send them at the same time as the Brabant drawings. Be of good heart, and good handshake. Thanks again for your letters and for your consignment. If you need anything, say so. Business is going well and I have everything I need. Warm regards from Jo and the little one. Enclosed is their portrait. Yours, Theo Paris 10 May 1890 My dear Vincent, Thanks very much for your two letters;1 I’m very happy that the improvement continues, and it would give me great pleasure if you could make the journey, without danger. Does it also seem to you that it’s such a long time since we saw each other? Since you find it such an annoyance to travel with someone from the asylum, for heaven’s sake, 
   you must risk it, although I’m not like you and wouldn’t do it, to avoid, should the crisis seize hold of you again, all the miseries that would emerge should you, at an unknown station, have to deal with people you don’t know and who would treat you who knows how. Now if you leave, send me a telegram without fail so that I know what time you’ll be arriving at the Gare de Lyon so that I can come and fetch you. Of course you must come to our place, if you don’t mind making do with the little bedroom where we’ve put up Wil and several others. I wrote to Dr Gachet yesterday 
   to ask him when he’s coming to Paris, for he gives consultations then. And at the same time I asked him to find out about lodgings for you. Yes, the change of region might do you good, but towards winter it’s perhaps better that you should be in a warmer climate. But we’ll have time to talk about all that. I’ve written to Dr Peyron to tell him that if there isn’t a definite danger, he should do as you wish and let you go. As he’s been kind to you, try not to hurt him. I had ordered the colours you asked for from Tanguy and Tasset, telling myself that anyway it wouldn’t be lost. If the colours hadn’t 
   yet arrived, leave orders for them to be sent on. Will you at last be able to find a place where you can have a little tranquillity without having people and things around you that annoy you? I hope so with all my heart, and it’s possible that in any event this might be an improvement, but people are more or less the same everywhere, and when artistic things preoccupy you, you find very few people who understand you. It’s Latin to them, and they regard it only as a pastime that isn’t to be taken seriously. I haven’t yet been to the Salon, which is apparently very mediocre, so they say, but there’s an exhibition of Japanese drawings and prints which you’ll see when you come, which is superb. I’d like you to be here already, don’t forget to telegraph me. Warm regards from Jo and the little one, they’re both well. Good handshake, and au revoir. Theo I’m enclosing 150 francs for the journey, telegraph me if by chance it isn’t enough. Paris 2 June 1890 My dear Vincent, Last week I was very busy with that Raffaëlli exhibition, we stayed open until 10 o’clock in the evening. Without that I would already have replied to your last letter. I hope that the area continues to please you and that your boarding-house 
   is good. At mère Siron’s in Barbizon2 people paid 5 francs, or 4 francs 50 if they stayed there a long time, and it was excellent. When I was in Auvers I dined with my friend Martin3 in an inn that was down below. There was the Oise there, I think, next some fields, the main road, and this inn was on this road. One ate extremely well there in those days, and not expensively. I must come one time, and I’m very receptive to your proposal that I should come with Jo and the little one, for I feel quite emptied, and the countryside would do me good. But we must 
   also see Mother and Jo’s parents. If I can have around 3 weeks’ holiday, we’d first go to you and then to Holland. That would be at the beginning of August, probably. It would do us all a lot of good to spend a little time in the country. What you write about Doctor Gachet interests me a great deal, I hope that you’ll become good friends with him. I’d very much like to have a friend who was a doctor, for at every turn one would like to know, especially for the little one, where illnesses come from. Fortunately he’s 
   quite well, but a week ago we’d gone to St-Cloud, and there we were caught unawares by torrential rain the like of which I’ve never seen. The café where we took refuge was flooded, there was a good foot of water. That and the jostling in the evening to get the train made us worried, but all he had was a heavy cold and Jo had nothing, although her milk would probably no longer have been good. That can happen with wet feet. A parcel arrived here, returned from St-Rémy, and I’m sending it to you. Dr Peyron told me about it when asking for news of you. We’ll be happy to have good news from you. If you were here the little one would smile nicely at you. How detached from all other preoccupations is the smile of a child. Good handshake, and warm regards from Jo and the little one. Theo Paris 5 June 1890 My dear Vincent, We’re as pleased as can be that you were able to write to us that you’re still well and that the stay in Auvers has had rather a good influence on your health. Yesterday Dr Gachet came to see me, and unfortunately there were people there, which prevented me from talking with him much, but what he said to me 
   was that he thought you cured and that he saw no need at all for it to recur. He has invited us to come to his house next Sunday, where you would be too. We’d darned well like to do it, but all the same it isn’t possible for Jo to promise it outright. We went to St-Cloud on Whit Sunday, and there we had that terrible downpour that must have fallen where you are too. Although the little one didn’t catch cold he’s been all upset since then, probably by the crowd we were obliged to pass through. Would you go and see Dr Gachet and tell him that if  the weather is fine we accept with great pleasure, 
   but that we dare not promise outright, and that if we come we’d want to be home again before the evening. There’s a train at 5. which we’d take. In the morning we’d leave with the 10. train, which arrives at Chaponval at 11.. The Dr said to get off there, that he wanted to come to meet us. My dear fellow, the letter had to wait awhile again and I must finish it in haste. The exhibition is giving me an enormous amount of work but also satisfaction. Tasset has sent the colours today, and they leave tomorrow with the Bargues. Guillaumin has placed at your disposal a magnificent painting which was at Tanguy’s, Sunset. It will look good in your studio. Gausson wants to do an exchange with you, anything you want of his in exchange for 
   what you want to give him. I told him to come one day with me to see you at your place. Aurier will also come one day. He’s very pleased with your painting, and will come with me one Sunday to see you. I must say goodbye. I’ll come in any case at the stated time. Jo sends her warm regards, and a smile from the little one. Yours, Theo Don’t wear yourself out, and take good care of yourself, regards to the doctor. Have your things finally arrived? Arles 10 June 1890 Mr Vincent I am replying to your two letters, if we have delayed so long it is that my husband has been ill, he had a little accident, he had some friends, as chance had it they were present at the arrival of the bullocks, and the bullock butted him in the ribs, he could not walk, it gave him great pain, as for me I am much better, but I am still very tired, I cannot do anything. On Saturday he will send what you ask of us.
   He is much better, he can start to work in a few days, we would really have wanted to see you before leaving, we really regretted that you did not come here to Arles. You have compliments from all the neighbours. Mrs Bressy3 says they will go and see you for a day or two in Paris. Nothing else for the moment, give us news of yourself sometimes, you will give us great pleasure, we shall not remain so long in giving you a reply.
   I shall end, my husband joins with me in shaking your hand in our hearts and in friendship. Mrs Ginoux On Saturday he will send you your things to your address which you sent us. My dear Vincent – Your letter had made me believe that you had gone back to the north, that’s to say Holland, and I didn’t reply, as I was awaiting your address. I’ve seen the canvas of Mrs Ginoux. Very fine and very curious, I like it better than my drawing. Despite your ailing state you have never worked with so much balance while conserving the sensation and the interior warmth needed for a work of art, precisely in an era when art is a business regulated in advance by cold calculations. Do you remember our conversations of old in Arles when it was a question of founding the studio of the tropics. 
   I’m on the point of carrying out this plan, if I obtain a small sum necessary to found the establishment. I’ll then go to Madagascar with a gentle, moneyless tribe that lives from the soil. I have very precise information from various sides. I’ll turn a little earthen and wooden hut into a comfortable house with my ten fingers; I’ll plant all things for food there myself, hens, cows etc and in a short time I’ll have my material life assured there. Those who want to come there later will find all the materials there for working with very few expenses. And the studio of the tropics will perhaps form the St John the Baptist of the painting of the future,
   re-immersed there in a more natural, more primitive and above all less putrefied life. At this moment I’d willingly give all my canvases at 100 francs each to succeed in realizing my dream. In Madagascar I’m sure of having the calm necessary for good work. For the moment I’m going to spend two months in Brittany with De Haan. Still the same address at Le Pouldu, near Quimperlé (Finistère). Let’s hope that you’re going to manage to recover completely in Auvers. 
   Cordially Ever yours, P. Gauguin Paris 15 July 18901 My dear Vincent, I’m really pleased that the news you give us remains good, and that the courage for work is far from abandoning you. Tasset is to send you the colours you ask for today. Tanguy was telling me the other day that the tubes from Tasset were much shorter and therefore contained less paint than his. If that was the case tell me, for I can make use of that to have a reduction 
   in the price. It will be much calmer for you when your furniture has arrived too, so that you may perhaps be able to find a colleague to stay with you. There’s a Dutchman who’ll come and see you, he was recommended by De Bock4 who had recommended Fontainebleau5 to him, but he doesn’t find it to his taste. I don’t know if he has any talent, he had nothing to show. Lauzet came yesterday morning to see your paintings, he’s very busy with his Monticellis, which are going to be published in ten days’ time. He7 very much likes the portrait of a woman you did in Arles. It’s perhaps just what he needs for his Martinique project, but if it’s to depend on a payment to an inventor10 it isn’t yet 
   really certain. Enclosed with this letter you’ll find a letter from him which he asked me to send you. His stay with Schuffenecker12 isn’t doing him any good, he’s hardly working at all there, whereas Brittany inspires him. So it’s good that he’s leaving. I give you Jo’s regards, I must finish in haste, otherwise the letter won’t go off today. She’s a little indisposed, but I hope that it won’t be anything serious. Good handshake. Theo 23 June 1890 My dear Vincent, I have something to write to you which I think will give you pleasure. Yesterday I was first at the Salon with Boch, who then came to lunch, after which we saw your paintings. He likes them very much, and it seems to me that he understands them. As you had said that you would willingly do an exchange with him, when I saw that he preferred the canvas you did after reading Rod’s book, I told him that he could 
   take that one in exchange for a painting of his. He seemed delighted, and put everything he had at your disposal. I went with him to see what he had with him, and among them was a canvas of around no. 20 done at Frameries in the Borinage, depicting the factory of Crachet & Pecry, which perhaps you remember, the whole factory is in smoke and steam and stands out darkly with very bright reflections of the sun on one side against the green wheat. The sky is very luminous. I think that above all the subject and the intention of what he wanted to do are remarkable. It’s neither very skilful nor powerful, but very sincere, like the fellow himself. If you don’t like this canvas he’ll willingly change it for another, but it would astonish me if you didn’t like it at all. The Salon is pitiful, 
   there’s almost nothing there that isn’t profoundly boring. You, though, judged well as regards the Quost. If I had to choose one that’s the one I’d take. It is Easter flowers. It’s very gentle and harmonious, and all the same there’s colour in it. The Jeannins are good too, but they’re full of bluster. I saw Quost the other day and I spoke to him about you. I was telling him that you liked his talent very much, which pleased him very much, he said. If you come to Paris you mustn’t fail to go and see him, he’ll be very pleased when you come to see him, either in the park or at his place. And now I must tell you something about your etching. It’s a real painter’s etching. No refinement in the procedure, but a drawing done on metal. I like 
   this drawing very much. Boch also liked it. It’s amusing that Dr Gachet has this press, painters who make etchings are always complaining that they have to go to the printer for the proofs. I think that Auvers has a lot of good, and I would very much like you to be of that opinion. We’re already looking forward with a great deal of pleasure to coming to see you soon. For different reasons, first to see you, secondly to see your work, thirdly for the beautiful nature, and fourthly because I hope that seeing the countryside will give me strength for being able to work a great deal. The Raffaëlli exhibition is finished, now the people are all going to the country and I’m not losing much by not being there. I’m enclosing 50 francs for you with this letter. Last week Jo had to stay in bed all the time, but fortunately it’s gone now. The little one is well. Warm regards, also from Jo and the little one. Ever yours, Theo My dear Vincent On my return from a little trip I found both your letter1 and your proof etching. De Haan and I had been to spend 5 days in Pont-Aven, my former residence which is 6 leagues from Le Pouldu. Your letter doesn’t tell me very much: if you’ve seen my canvases in Paris at Goupil’s, what do you think of them! If my planned journey to Madagascar appears unreasonable to you. I dream of it every day, to the point where I’m scarcely working at all at the moment, wanting to rest a little, gain new strength for down there.
   And you, you’re insatiable; I see that you haven’t been losing any time in Auvers. It’s good, though, to rest the mind and the body sometimes. Your idea of coming to Brittany at Le Pouldu seems excellent to me if it could be put into effect. For we are, De Haan and I, in a little hole far from the town. Without any communication other than a hired cart. And for a sick man who needs a doctor, it’s sometimes risky. At Pont-Aven it’s different, there’s a doctor and people. In addition, if I manage to sort things out to go to Madagascar I’ll no longer be here 
   at the beginning of September, like De Haan, who’s going to go back to Holland. That, in all honesty, is the situation. And however God knows how much it would please me to see our friend Vincent close to us. I don’t know Doctor Gachet but I’ve often heard père Pissarro speak of him. And it must be pleasant for you to have someone close to you who sympathizes with your work, your ideas. Alas, I see myself condemned to be less and less understood, and I must hold fast to following 
   my way alone, to drag out an existence without a family like a pariah. So the solitude in the woods seems to me in the future to be a new and almost dreamed-of paradise. The savage will return to savagery. At last! Destiny once written cannot be overturned. Friendly greetings from our friend De Haan. Cordially Ever yours, Paul Gauguin Paris, 30 June 1890 My very dear brother, We’ve been going through the greatest anxiety, our dear one has been very ill, but fortunately the doctor, who was anxious himself, said to Jo yesterday, you won’t lose the child from this. Here in Paris the best milk one can get is a veritable poison. Now we’re giving him ass’s milk2 and that has done him good, but you’ve never heard anything so painful as this almost continual plaintive crying lasting several days and several nights and with us not knowing what to do and 
   everything we do seeming to aggravate his suffering. It’s not that the milk isn’t fresh, but it’s in the feeding and the treatment of the cows. It’s abominable. You can imagine how happy we are that it’s going better. Jo has been admirable, as you can well imagine. A true mother, but she has tired herself very much, too much even, may she recover her strength and not have any more ordeals to undergo. At this moment, fortunately, she’s sleeping, but she’s moaning in her sleep and I can do nothing about it. If only the child, who is also sleeping, might let her sleep for a few hours, both of them will awake with a smile, I hope. In general life is hard for her at the moment. We don’t know what we ought to do, there are questions. Ought we to take another apartment, you know, in the same house on the first floor? Ought we 
    to go to Auvers, to Holland or not. Ought I to live without worrying about tomorrow, and when I work all day and still don’t manage to spare this good Jo from worries about money, since those rats Boussod & Valadon treat me as if I’d just started working for them and keep me on a leash. When I’m not calculating, without spending on extras and am short of money, must I tell them how things are, and if they dare refuse, finally tell them, Sirs, I’m taking the plunge and I’m going to set myself up as a dealer on my own account? I think that as I write to you I’m reaching this conclusion, that it’s my duty, and that if Ma or Jo or you or I tighten our belts a little, it won’t get us anywhere, and that on the contrary, you and I by moving in the world not as poor down-and-outs who don’t eat, but on the contrary keeping up our courage and all living buoyed up by our mutual love, 
   we’ll go much further and we’ll accomplish our duty and our task with much more serenity than by weighing each mouthful of bread. What do you say to this old chap? Don’t bother your head about me or about us, old chap, be aware that what gives me the greatest pleasure is when you’re well and when you’re at your work, which is admirable. You already have too much fire, and we must still be ready for battle a long time from now, for we’ll battle all our lives without taking the oats of charity they give to the old horses in grand houses. We’ll pull the plough until it moves no longer, and we’ll still gaze with admiration at the sun or the moon, according to the time of day. We like that better than being put in an armchair to rub our legs like the old merchant in Auvers. Look old fellow, do everything for your health, I too will do as much, we have too much in our noddles 
   for us to forget the daisies and the freshly stirred clods of earth, and the branches of the bushes that bud in spring, nor the bare tree branches that shiver in the winter, nor the serene skies of limpid blue, nor the big clouds of autumn, nor the uniformly grey sky in winter, nor the sun as it rose above our aunts’ garden, nor the red sun setting in the sea at Scheveningen, nor the moon and the stars one fine night in summer or winter, no, whatever happens, that is our possession. Is it enough, no, myself I have and you will have one day, I hope with all my heart, a wife to whom you can say these things, and I whose mouth is often closed and whose head is often empty, it’s through her that the seeds that more than likely come from very far off but which were passed on by our beloved father and 
  mother, they will perhaps grow so that I may become at least a man, and who knows if my son, if he may live and if I can help him, who knows he may be someone. For your part you have found your path, old brother, your carriage is already sturdy and strong, and I myself can glimpse my path thanks to my cherished wife. As for you, calm yourself and rein back your horse a little so that no accidents occur, and as for me a flick of the whip from time to time does no harm. Your portrait of Miss Gachet must be admirable, and I’ll be pleased to see it, oh those little patches of orange in the background. The croquis of the landscape makes me think of something very beautiful. I’ll be pleased to see it. Père Peyron’s letter was kind. These people are good sorts after all. Listen, soon, when Jo is a bit stronger and the little one recovered, 
    you should come and spend the days here, at least a Sunday and a few days more. The salons are closed but you aren’t losing much by that, for we’ll go together to see the Quost, which decidedly is a fine painting. We’ll go and ask him if I may exhibit it on the boulevard in the window, if it’s not too big. But it must work, and there’ll also be something of yours, old fellow, come on! You really must be together, for it’s you who pointed out this fine Quost painting to me. Do you remember that I told you that I’d bought that fine painting by Corot that those b... B & V said wasn’t saleable. Tersteeg sold it to Mesdag with 5, profit, and Mesdag is so pleased with it that he wants others like that, and is writing to Arnold & Tripp to find him some like that. It pleased me, but B & V will start again tomorrow all the same. Yours, my old brother, the colours are going off. I shake your hand firmly, and am pleased that the little one and his mummy are sleeping peacefully, your Theo 
   This morning I woke up with the same ideas. It’s decided in an unshakeable way, when I go out, I’m going to rent that apartment as a start. The kid slept well, he’s well this morning. Adieu.  1 July 1890 Dear Sir, Following your instructions, I am sending you a postal order for 20 francs, the remainder of the amount that I had in my possession. I see with pleasure that your health continues to be satisfactory, and that your life in the midst of this world of artists is spent more pleasantly than here.  I shall be happy to hear of your future successes in the various 
   exhibitions in which you will take part. With my sincerest regards. Dr T. Peyron Paris 5 July 1890 My dear Vincent, Thanks very much for your letter. Fortunately mine brings you good news of the little one. After a few days of suffering he has started to be jolly again and no longer to cry so much. It’s thanks to the good ass’s milk we’re currently giving him. The animals come to the door, and in the morning he receives warm milk, always 
   from the same animal. Afterwards there’s still enough for two doses, which he receives alternately with his mother’s milk, which is now coming in abundance. He looks extremely well at the moment. He must take the ass’s milk for at least a fortnight, and so we can’t go to Pissarro’s on 14 July. So I’ve taken that day to go to see Claude Monet with Valadon, who will certainly get on my nerves on that day, but I’m content to go and see the new works by Monet. There’s no reason for you to put back your arrival, not that we don’t appreciate that you wanted 
   to come and share my pains, on the contrary, thank you, but with a patient, the fewer people there are around the better it is. So come if you like on Sunday with the first train, in the morning you’ll see Walpole Brooke, who’s coming to see your paintings at Tanguy’s, next a Japanese Buddha which I saw in a curio shop, and after that we’re going to have lunch at our place to see your studies. You can stay with us as long as you want, and you can give us advice on the arrangement of our new apartment. Dries and Annie will probably come to the ground floor, and they’ll have a little garden which we, naturally, will have the benefit of. If the two women 
   get on with each other it promises well. Perhaps good that Dries will come to our place. I’m having a lot of luck in business, even if I haven’t sold paintings for 800,,, francs, but among other things I’ve sold two Gauguins, for which I’ve sent him the amount. Pissarro wrote to me that he wasn’t able to pay his rent, I’m going to send him a little advance on the business we’ll do. You see, his exhibition really brought him in something, but still just to plug the holes. He’s had an abscess on the eye. Poor old chap!5 Good-day to you brother, we’re counting on seeing you on Sunday. Warm regards from Jo, and the little one is smiling at you like before he was ill. Good handshake from your brother who loves you. Theo Regards to Dr Gachet and his family. The croquis of the landscape à la Michel is promising, and the portrait must be superb. 14 July 1890 My dear Vincent, We’re very pleased that you’re no longer so much under the impression of matters being unresolved as when you were here. Really, the danger isn’t as grave as you believed. If we can all have good health, which may enable us to undertake what, in our heads, is little by little becoming a necessity, all will go well. Disappointments certainly, but we’re not beginners, and we’re 
   like carters who with all the horses’ efforts have almost reached the top of the hill, they do an about-turn and often then, with a new effort, they reach the top. If only we were always thinking of that! Today we’re in the middle of packing our trunks to leave tomorrow for Leiden. On Wednesday I’m going from there to Mesdag to talk to him about the Corot, then to Antwerp with a painting by Diaz. Although the week has now passed, those gentlemen have said nothing as regards what they’re thinking of doing with me. Dries, on the contrary, has proved very cowardly, and seems to be dominated by his wife. He declared quite openly that all I was doing as regards him was to lure him into the apartment below us so as to have his wife as a sort of maid. I cannot believe that that comes from him. However, I didn’t think 
   that his wife was that mad. It’s the second time he’s withdrawn at the decisive moment, and however you were there when we were talking, and he answered me squarely that I could count on him. I can’t understand it except by attributing this hesitation to his wife. Much good may it do him. Enclosed with this letter you’ll receive 50 francs. If I had the good fortune to do business during my travels that would put me even more at ease. Warm regards, old fellow, I’ll probably be back in a week’s time. Warm regards from Jo, and believe me your brother who loves you. Theo 22 July 1890 My dear Vincent, From Holland Jo sent me your letter, which had followed us, and I read it with some surprise. Where did you see these violent domestic quarrels? That we were very tired by uninterrupted preoccupations on the subject of all our futures, yes; that I didn’t really know where my interest lay with this affair as regards the company, yes, but really I don’t see the intense domestic quarrels you speak of. Is it the discussion with Dries? Certainly I’d wanted to see him a little bolder in undertaking 
   something, but that’s how it is, and it’s no reason to break with him. Is it perhaps, but I can’t believe it, that you consider it an intense domestic quarrel that Jo asked you not to put the Prévost4 in the place where you wanted to hang it? She hadn’t thought to hurt you with that, and certainly would have preferred you to leave it there than to get angry about it. Her child preoccupies her too much for her to have much time to think about painting, and although she already sees much better than she used to, she doesn’t always see immediately what’s in it. No, if it was that trifle I would tell you to stop it, for it’s not worth the trouble of bothering with it. I hope, my dear Vincent, that your health is good, and as you said that you’re writing with difficulty and don’t speak to me about your work, I’m a little afraid that there’s something that’s bothering you or that isn’t 
   going right. In that case, do go and see Dr Gachet, he’ll perhaps give you something that will buck you up again. Give me news of you as soon as possible. Last Tuesday I took Jo and the child to Leiden and stayed there until Thursday. Mother has indeed aged a little, but she was so pleased to see her grandson, and it was amusing to see how she took him and made him happy. Wil was also well and was very kind to us. Jo stayed with them for another day after I left, and then left for Amsterdam where she still is. I hope that everyone is making efforts not to tire her but is allowing her a little rest, she had such need of it, for it’s hard labour, I assure you. Unfortunately, like here, the weather isn’t settled there, so that she can’t be out in the open air much and nor can 
   the child. I think that it might well be that she wishes to come back sooner than we’d planned, but it’s good on the other hand that her house here pleases her more than that of her parents. I’ll be very pleased when she’s back, for the house is so deserted! And I miss the little one too. Our life, precisely through this child, is so closely bound together that you mustn’t be afraid that one small disagreement, if you saw one, might occasion a divergence that will make conciliation difficult. So don’t think about that any more. As for me, the journey to Holland has done me a lot of good and made me take a lot of rest, which I very much needed. Let’s hope that the health of all of us may improve, for health is a great deal. Enclosed I’m sending you 50 francs – write to me quickly, and believe me your brother who loves you. Theo Monday Regards to Maître Van Gogh from his devoted Dr Gachet 